<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h2>
    <p>
      The breakfast-things were not yet cleared away. A plate streaked with fine
      strains of marmalade, an empty toast-rack, a broken roll&mdash;these and
      other things bore witness to a day inaugurated in the right spirit.
    </p>
    <p>
      Away from them, reclining along his window-seat, was the Duke. Blue
      spirals rose from his cigarette, nothing in the still air to trouble them.
      From their railing, across the road, the Emperors gazed at him.
    </p>
    <p>
      For a young man, sleep is a sure solvent of distress. There whirls not for
      him in the night any so hideous a phantasmagoria as will not become, in
      the clarity of next morning, a spruce procession for him to lead. Brief
      the vague horror of his awakening; memory sweeps back to him, and he sees
      nothing dreadful after all. &ldquo;Why not?&rdquo; is the sun&rsquo;s bright message to him,
      and &ldquo;Why not indeed?&rdquo; his answer. After hours of agony and doubt prolonged
      to cock-crow, sleep had stolen to the Duke&rsquo;s bed-side. He awoke late, with
      a heavy sense of disaster; but lo! when he remembered, everything took on
      a new aspect. He was in love. &ldquo;Why not?&rdquo; He mocked himself for the morbid
      vigil he had spent in probing and vainly binding the wounds of his false
      pride. The old life was done with. He laughed as he stepped into his bath.
      Why should the disseizin of his soul have seemed shameful to him? He had
      had no soul till it passed out of his keeping. His body thrilled to the
      cold water, his soul as to a new sacrament. He was in love, and that was
      all he wished for... There, on the dressing-table, lay the two studs,
      visible symbols of his love. Dear to him, now, the colours of them! He
      took them in his hand, one by one, fondling them. He wished he could wear
      them in the day-time; but this, of course, was impossible. His toilet
      finished, he dropped them into the left pocket of his waistcoat.
    </p>
    <p>
      Therein, near to his heart, they were lying now, as he looked out at the
      changed world&mdash;the world that had become Zuleika. &ldquo;Zuleika!&rdquo; his
      recurrent murmur, was really an apostrophe to the whole world.
    </p>
    <p>
      Piled against the wall were certain boxes of black japanned tin, which had
      just been sent to him from London. At any other time he would certainly
      not have left them unopened. For they contained his robes of the Garter.
      Thursday, the day after to-morrow, was the date fixed for the investiture
      of a foreign king who was now visiting England: and the full chapter of
      Knights had been commanded to Windsor for the ceremony. Yesterday the Duke
      had looked keenly forward to his excursion. It was only in those too
      rarely required robes that he had the sense of being fully dressed. But
      to-day not a thought had he of them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Some clock clove with silver the stillness of the morning. Ere came the
      second stroke, another and nearer clock was striking. And now there were
      others chiming in. The air was confused with the sweet babel of its many
      spires, some of them booming deep, measured sequences, some tinkling
      impatiently and outwitting others which had begun before them. And when
      this anthem of jealous antiphonies and uneven rhythms had dwindled quite
      away and fainted in one last solitary note of silver, there started
      somewhere another sequence; and this, almost at its last stroke, was
      interrupted by yet another, which went on to tell the hour of noon in its
      own way, quite slowly and significantly, as though none knew it.
    </p>
    <p>
      And now Oxford was astir with footsteps and laughter&mdash;the laughter
      and quick footsteps of youths released from lecture-rooms. The Duke
      shifted from the window. Somehow, he did not care to be observed, though
      it was usually at this hour that he showed himself for the setting of some
      new fashion in costume. Many an undergraduate, looking up, missed the
      picture in the window-frame.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Duke paced to and fro, smiling ecstatically. He took the two studs
      from his pocket and gazed at them. He looked in the glass, as one seeking
      the sympathy of a familiar. For the first time in his life, he turned
      impatiently aside. It was a new kind of sympathy he needed to-day.
    </p>
    <p>
      The front door slammed, and the staircase creaked to the ascent of two
      heavy boots. The Duke listened, waited irresolute. The boots passed his
      door, were already clumping up the next flight. &ldquo;Noaks!&rdquo; he cried. The
      boots paused, then clumped down again. The door opened and disclosed that
      homely figure which Zuleika had seen on her way to Judas.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sensitive reader, start not at the apparition! Oxford is a plexus of
      anomalies. These two youths were (odd as it may seem to you) subject to
      the same Statutes, affiliated to the same College, reading for the same
      School; aye! and though the one had inherited half a score of noble and
      castellated roofs, whose mere repairs cost him annually thousands and
      thousands of pounds, and the other&rsquo;s people had but one little mean square
      of lead, from which the fireworks of the Crystal Palace were clearly
      visible every Thursday evening, in Oxford one roof sheltered both of them.
      Furthermore, there was even some measure of intimacy between them. It was
      the Duke&rsquo;s whim to condescend further in the direction of Noaks than in
      any other. He saw in Noaks his own foil and antithesis, and made a point
      of walking up the High with him at least once in every term. Noaks, for
      his part, regarded the Duke with feelings mingled of idolatry and
      disapproval. The Duke&rsquo;s First in Mods oppressed him (who, by dint of
      dogged industry, had scraped a Second) more than all the other differences
      between them. But the dullard&rsquo;s envy of brilliant men is always assuaged
      by the suspicion that they will come to a bad end. Noaks may have regarded
      the Duke as a rather pathetic figure, on the whole.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come in, Noaks,&rdquo; said the Duke. &ldquo;You have been to a lecture?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Aristotle&rsquo;s Politics,&rdquo; nodded Noaks.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And what were they?&rdquo; asked the Duke. He was eager for sympathy in his
      love. But so little used was he to seeking sympathy that he could not
      unburden himself. He temporised. Noaks muttered something about getting
      back to work, and fumbled with the door-handle.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, my dear fellow, don&rsquo;t go,&rdquo; said the Duke. &ldquo;Sit down. Our Schools
      don&rsquo;t come on for another year. A few minutes can&rsquo;t make a difference in
      your Class. I want to&mdash;to tell you something, Noaks. Do sit down.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Noaks sat down on the edge of a chair. The Duke leaned against the
      mantel-piece, facing him. &ldquo;I suppose, Noaks,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;you have never
      been in love.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why shouldn&rsquo;t I have been in love?&rdquo; asked the little man, angrily.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t imagine you in love,&rdquo; said the Duke, smiling.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And I can&rsquo;t imagine YOU. You&rsquo;re too pleased with yourself,&rdquo; growled
      Noaks.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Spur your imagination, Noaks,&rdquo; said his friend. &ldquo;I AM in love.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So am I,&rdquo; was an unexpected answer, and the Duke (whose need of sympathy
      was too new to have taught him sympathy with others) laughed aloud. &ldquo;Whom
      do you love?&rdquo; he asked, throwing himself into an arm-chair.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know who she is,&rdquo; was another unexpected answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When did you meet her?&rdquo; asked the Duke. &ldquo;Where? What did you say to her?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yesterday. In the Corn. I didn&rsquo;t SAY anything to her.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is she beautiful?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes. What&rsquo;s that to you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dark or fair?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She&rsquo;s dark. She looks like a foreigner. She looks like&mdash;like one of
      those photographs in the shop-windows.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A rhapsody, Noaks! What became of her? Was she alone?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She was with the old Warden, in his carriage.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Zuleika&mdash;Noaks! The Duke started, as at an affront, and glared. Next
      moment, he saw the absurdity of the situation. He relapsed into his chair,
      smiling. &ldquo;She&rsquo;s the Warden&rsquo;s niece,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I dined at the Warden&rsquo;s
      last night.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Noaks sat still, peering across at the Duke. For the first time in his
      life, he was resentful of the Duke&rsquo;s great elegance and average stature,
      his high lineage and incomputable wealth. Hitherto, these things had been
      too remote for envy. But now, suddenly, they seemed near to him&mdash;nearer
      and more overpowering than the First in Mods had ever been. &ldquo;And of course
      she&rsquo;s in love with you?&rdquo; he snarled.
    </p>
    <p>
      Really, this was for the Duke a new issue. So salient was his own passion
      that he had not had time to wonder whether it were returned. Zuleika&rsquo;s
      behaviour during dinner... But that was how so many young women had
      behaved. It was no sign of disinterested love. It might mean merely... Yet
      no! Surely, looking into her eyes, he had seen there a radiance finer than
      could have been lit by common ambition. Love, none other, must have lit in
      those purple depths the torches whose clear flames had leapt out to him.
      She loved him. She, the beautiful, the wonderful, had not tried to conceal
      her love for him. She had shown him all&mdash;had shown all, poor darling!
      only to be snubbed by a prig, driven away by a boor, fled from by a fool.
      To the nethermost corner of his soul, he cursed himself for what he had
      done, and for all he had left undone. He would go to her on his knees. He
      would implore her to impose on him insufferable penances. There was no
      penance, how bittersweet soever, could make him a little worthy of her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come in!&rdquo; he cried mechanically. Entered the landlady&rsquo;s daughter.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A lady downstairs,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;asking to see your Grace. Says she&rsquo;ll step
      round again later if your Grace is busy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is her name?&rdquo; asked the Duke, vacantly. He was gazing at the girl
      with pain-shot eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Zuleika Dobson,&rdquo; pronounced the girl.
    </p>
    <p>
      He rose.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Show Miss Dobson up,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Noaks had darted to the looking-glass and was smoothing his hair with a
      tremulous, enormous hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Go!&rdquo; said the Duke, pointing to the door. Noaks went, quickly. Echoes of
      his boots fell from the upper stairs and met the ascending susurrus of a
      silk skirt.
    </p>
    <p>
      The lovers met. There was an interchange of ordinary greetings: from the
      Duke, a comment on the weather; from Zuleika, a hope that he was well
      again&mdash;they had been so sorry to lose him last night. Then came a
      pause. The landlady&rsquo;s daughter was clearing away the breakfast-things.
      Zuleika glanced comprehensively at the room, and the Duke gazed at the
      hearthrug. The landlady&rsquo;s daughter clattered out with her freight. They
      were alone.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How pretty!&rdquo; said Zuleika. She was looking at his star of the Garter,
      which sparkled from a litter of books and papers on a small side-table.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; he answered. &ldquo;It is pretty, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Awfully pretty!&rdquo; she rejoined.
    </p>
    <p>
      This dialogue led them to another hollow pause. The Duke&rsquo;s heart beat
      violently within him. Why had he not asked her to take the star and keep
      it as a gift? Too late now! Why could he not throw himself at her feet?
      Here were two beings, lovers of each other, with none by. And yet...
    </p>
    <p>
      She was examining a water-colour on the wall, seemed to be absorbed by it.
      He watched her. She was even lovelier than he had remembered; or rather
      her loveliness had been, in some subtle way, transmuted. Something had
      given to her a graver, nobler beauty. Last night&rsquo;s nymph had become the
      Madonna of this morning. Despite her dress, which was of a tremendous
      tartan, she diffused the pale authentic radiance of a spirituality most
      high, most simple. The Duke wondered where lay the change in her. He could
      not understand. Suddenly she turned to him, and he understood. No longer
      the black pearl and the pink, but two white pearls!... He thrilled to his
      heart&rsquo;s core.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hope,&rdquo; said Zuleika, &ldquo;you aren&rsquo;t awfully vexed with me for coming like
      this?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not at all,&rdquo; said the Duke. &ldquo;I am delighted to see you.&rdquo; How inadequate
      the words sounded, how formal and stupid!
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The fact is,&rdquo; she continued, &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know a soul in Oxford. And I
      thought perhaps you&rsquo;d give me luncheon, and take me to see the boat-races.
      Will you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I shall be charmed,&rdquo; he said, pulling the bell-rope. Poor fool! he
      attributed the shade of disappointment on Zuleika&rsquo;s face to the coldness
      of his tone. He would dispel that shade. He would avow himself. He would
      leave her no longer in this false position. So soon as he had told them
      about the meal, he would proclaim his passion.
    </p>
    <p>
      The bell was answered by the landlady&rsquo;s daughter.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Dobson will stay to luncheon,&rdquo; said the Duke. The girl withdrew. He
      wished he could have asked her not to.
    </p>
    <p>
      He steeled himself. &ldquo;Miss Dobson,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;I wish to apologise to you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Zuleika looked at him eagerly. &ldquo;You can&rsquo;t give me luncheon? You&rsquo;ve got
      something better to do?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No. I wish to ask you to forgive me for my behaviour last night.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is nothing to forgive.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is. My manners were vile. I know well what happened. Though you,
      too, cannot have forgotten, I won&rsquo;t spare myself the recital. You were my
      hostess, and I ignored you. Magnanimous, you paid me the prettiest
      compliment woman ever paid to man, and I insulted you. I left the house in
      order that I might not see you again. To the doorsteps down which he
      should have kicked me, your grandfather followed me with words of
      kindliest courtesy. If he had sped me with a kick so skilful that my skull
      had been shattered on the kerb, neither would he have outstepped those
      bounds set to the conduct of English gentlemen, nor would you have
      garnered more than a trifle on account of your proper reckoning. I do not
      say that you are the first person whom I have wantonly injured. But it is
      a fact that I, in whom pride has ever been the topmost quality, have never
      expressed sorrow to any one for anything. Thus, I might urge that my
      present abjectness must be intolerably painful to me, and should incline
      you to forgive. But such an argument were specious merely. I will be quite
      frank with you. I will confess to you that, in this humbling of myself
      before you, I take a pleasure as passionate as it is strange. A confusion
      of feelings? Yet you, with a woman&rsquo;s instinct, will have already caught
      the clue to it. It needs no mirror to assure me that the clue is here for
      you, in my eyes. It needs no dictionary of quotations to remind me that
      the eyes are the windows of the soul. And I know that from two open
      windows my soul has been leaning and signalling to you, in a code far more
      definitive and swifter than words of mine, that I love you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Zuleika, listening to him, had grown gradually paler and paler. She had
      raised her hands and cowered as though he were about to strike her. And
      then, as he pronounced the last three words, she had clasped her hands to
      her face and with a wild sob darted away from him. She was leaning now
      against the window, her head bowed and her shoulders quivering.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Duke came softly behind her. &ldquo;Why should you cry? Why should you turn
      away from me? Did I frighten you with the suddenness of my words? I am not
      versed in the tricks of wooing. I should have been more patient. But I
      love you so much that I could hardly have waited. A secret hope that you
      loved me too emboldened me, compelled me. You DO love me. I know it. And,
      knowing it, I do but ask you to give yourself to me, to be my wife. Why
      should you cry? Why should you shrink from me? Dear, if there were
      anything... any secret... if you had ever loved and been deceived, do you
      think I should honour you the less deeply, should not cherish you the more
      tenderly? Enough for me, that you are mine. Do you think I should ever
      reproach you for anything that may have&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Zuleika turned on him. &ldquo;How dare you?&rdquo; she gasped. &ldquo;How dare you speak to
      me like that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Duke reeled back. Horror had come into his eyes. &ldquo;You do not love me!&rdquo;
       he cried.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;LOVE you?&rdquo; she retorted. &ldquo;YOU?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You no longer love me. Why? Why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You loved me. Don&rsquo;t trifle with me. You came to me loving me with all
      your heart.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you know?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Look in the glass.&rdquo; She went at his bidding. He followed her. &ldquo;You see
      them?&rdquo; he said, after a long pause. Zuleika nodded. The two pearls
      quivered to her nod.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They were white when you came to me,&rdquo; he sighed. &ldquo;They were white because
      you loved me. From them it was that I knew you loved me even as I loved
      you. But their old colours have come back to them. That is how I know that
      your love for me is dead.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Zuleika stood gazing pensively, twitching the two pearls between her
      fingers. Tears gathered in her eyes. She met the reflection of her lover&rsquo;s
      eyes, and her tears brimmed over. She buried her face in her hands, and
      sobbed like a child.
    </p>
    <p>
      Like a child&rsquo;s, her sobbing ceased quite suddenly. She groped for her
      handkerchief, angrily dried her eyes, and straightened and smoothed
      herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now I&rsquo;m going,&rdquo; she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You came here of your own accord, because you loved me,&rdquo; said the Duke.
      &ldquo;And you shall not go till you have told me why you have left off loving
      me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How did you know I loved you?&rdquo; she asked after a pause. &ldquo;How did you know
      I hadn&rsquo;t simply put on another pair of ear-rings?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Duke, with a melancholy laugh, drew the two studs from his
      waistcoat-pocket. &ldquo;These are the studs I wore last night,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Zuleika gazed at them. &ldquo;I see,&rdquo; she said; then, looking up, &ldquo;When did they
      become like that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It was when you left the dining-room that I saw the change in them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How strange! It was when I went into the drawing-room that I noticed
      mine. I was looking in the glass, and&rdquo;&mdash;She started. &ldquo;Then you were
      in love with me last night?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I began to be in love with you from the moment I saw you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then how could you have behaved as you did?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because I was a pedant. I tried to ignore you, as pedants always do try
      to ignore any fact they cannot fit into their pet system. The basis of my
      pet system was celibacy. I don&rsquo;t mean the mere state of being a bachelor.
      I mean celibacy of the soul&mdash;egoism, in fact. You have converted me
      from that. I am now a confirmed tuist.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How dared you insult me?&rdquo; she cried, with a stamp of her foot. &ldquo;How dared
      you make a fool of me before those people? Oh, it is too infamous!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have already asked you to forgive me for that. You said there was
      nothing to forgive.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t dream that you were in love with me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What difference can that make?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All the difference! All the difference in life!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sit down! You bewilder me,&rdquo; said the Duke. &ldquo;Explain yourself!&rdquo; he
      commanded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t that rather much for a man to ask of a woman?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know. I have no experience of women. In the abstract, it seems to
      me that every man has a right to some explanation from the woman who has
      ruined his life.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are frightfully sorry for yourself,&rdquo; said Zuleika, with a bitter
      laugh. &ldquo;Of course it doesn&rsquo;t occur to you that <i>I</i> am at all to be
      pitied. No! you are blind with selfishness. You love me&mdash;I don&rsquo;t love
      you: that is all you can realise. Probably you think you are the first man
      who has ever fallen on such a plight.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Said the Duke, bowing over a deprecatory hand, &ldquo;If there were to pass my
      window one tithe of them whose hearts have been lost to Miss Dobson, I
      should win no solace from that interminable parade.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Zuleika blushed. &ldquo;Yet,&rdquo; she said more gently, &ldquo;be sure they would all be
      not a little envious of YOU! Not one of them ever touched the surface of
      my heart. You stirred my heart to its very depths. Yes, you made me love
      you madly. The pearls told you no lie. You were my idol&mdash;the one
      thing in the wide world to me. You were so different from any man I had
      ever seen except in dreams. You did not make a fool of yourself. I admired
      you. I respected you. I was all afire with adoration of you. And now,&rdquo; she
      passed her hand across her eyes, &ldquo;now it is all over. The idol has come
      sliding down its pedestal to fawn and grovel with all the other infatuates
      in the dust about my feet.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Duke looked thoughtfully at her. &ldquo;I thought,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;that you
      revelled in your power over men&rsquo;s hearts. I had always heard that you
      lived for admiration.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh,&rdquo; said Zuleika, &ldquo;of course I like being admired. Oh yes, I like all
      that very much indeed. In a way, I suppose, I&rsquo;m even pleased that YOU
      admire me. But oh, what a little miserable pleasure that is in comparison
      with the rapture I have forfeited! I had never known the rapture of being
      in love. I had longed for it, but I had never guessed how wonderfully
      wonderful it was. It came to me. I shuddered and wavered like a fountain
      in the wind. I was more helpless and flew lightlier than a shred of
      thistledown among the stars. All night long, I could not sleep for love of
      you; nor had I any desire of sleep, save that it might take me to you in a
      dream. I remember nothing that happened to me this morning before I found
      myself at your door.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why did you ring the bell? Why didn&rsquo;t you walk away?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why? I had come to see you, to be near you, to be WITH you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To force yourself on me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You know the meaning of the term &lsquo;effective occupation&rsquo;? Having marched
      in, how could you have held your position, unless&rdquo;&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, a man doesn&rsquo;t necessarily drive a woman away because he isn&rsquo;t in love
      with her.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yet that was what you thought I had done to you last night.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, but I didn&rsquo;t suppose you would take the trouble to do it again. And
      if you had, I should have only loved you the more. I thought you would
      most likely be rather amused, rather touched, by my importunity. I thought
      you would take a listless advantage, make a plaything of me&mdash;the
      diversion of a few idle hours in summer, and then, when you had tired of
      me, would cast me aside, forget me, break my heart. I desired nothing
      better than that. That is what I must have been vaguely hoping for. But I
      had no definite scheme. I wanted to be with you and I came to you. It
      seems years ago, now! How my heart beat as I waited on the doorstep! &lsquo;Is
      his Grace at home?&rsquo; &lsquo;I don&rsquo;t know. I&rsquo;ll inquire. What name shall I say?&rsquo; I
      saw in the girl&rsquo;s eyes that she, too, loved you. Have YOU seen that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have never looked at her,&rdquo; said the Duke.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No wonder, then, that she loves you,&rdquo; sighed Zuleika. &ldquo;She read my secret
      at a glance. Women who love the same man have a kind of bitter
      freemasonry. We resented each other. She envied me my beauty, my dress. I
      envied the little fool her privilege of being always near to you. Loving
      you, I could conceive no life sweeter than hers&mdash;to be always near
      you; to black your boots, carry up your coals, scrub your doorstep; always
      to be working for you, hard and humbly and without thanks. If you had
      refused to see me, I would have bribed that girl with all my jewels to
      cede me her position.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Duke made a step towards her. &ldquo;You would do it still,&rdquo; he said in a
      low voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      Zuleika raised her eyebrows. &ldquo;I would not offer her one garnet,&rdquo; she said,
      &ldquo;now.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You SHALL love me again,&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;I will force you to. You said just
      now that you had ceased to love me because I was just like other men. I am
      not. My heart is no tablet of mere wax, from which an instant&rsquo;s heat can
      dissolve whatever impress it may bear, leaving it blank and soft for
      another impress, and another, and another. My heart is a bright hard gem,
      proof against any die. Came Cupid, with one of his arrow-points for
      graver, and what he cut on the gem&rsquo;s surface never can be effaced. There,
      deeply and forever, your image is intagliated. No years, nor fires, nor
      cataclysm of total Nature, can efface from that great gem your image.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear Duke,&rdquo; said Zuleika, &ldquo;don&rsquo;t be so silly. Look at the matter
      sensibly. I know that lovers don&rsquo;t try to regulate their emotions
      according to logic; but they do, nevertheless, unconsciously conform with
      some sort of logical system. I left off loving you when I found that you
      loved me. There is the premiss. Very well! Is it likely that I shall begin
      to love you again because you can&rsquo;t leave off loving me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Duke groaned. There was a clatter of plates outside, and she whom
      Zuleika had envied came to lay the table for luncheon.
    </p>
    <p>
      A smile flickered across Zuleika&rsquo;s lips; and &ldquo;Not one garnet!&rdquo; she
      murmured.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
