<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h2>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The evil that men do lives after them; the good is oft interred with
      their bones.&rdquo; At any rate, the sinner has a better chance than the saint
      of being hereafter remembered. We, in whom original sin preponderates,
      find him easier to understand. He is near to us, clear to us. The saint is
      remote, dim. A very great saint may, of course, be remembered through some
      sheer force of originality in him; and then the very mystery that involves
      him for us makes him the harder to forget: he haunts us the more surely
      because we shall never understand him. But the ordinary saints grow faint
      to posterity; whilst quite ordinary sinners pass vividly down the ages.
    </p>
    <p>
      Of the disciples of Jesus, which is he that is most often remembered and
      cited by us? Not the disciple whom Jesus loved; neither of the Boanerges,
      nor any other of them who so steadfastly followed Him and served Him; but
      the disciple who betrayed Him for thirty pieces of silver. Judas Iscariot
      it is who outstands, overshadowing those other fishermen. And perhaps it
      was by reason of this precedence that Christopher Whitrid, Knight, in the
      reign of Henry VI., gave the name of Judas to the College which he had
      founded. Or perhaps it was because he felt that in a Christian community
      not even the meanest and basest of men should be accounted beneath
      contempt, beyond redemption.
    </p>
    <p>
      At any rate, thus he named his foundation. And, though for Oxford men the
      savour of the name itself has long evaporated through its local connexion,
      many things show that for the Founder himself it was no empty vocable. In
      a niche above the gate stands a rudely carved statue of Judas, holding a
      money-bag in his right hand. Among the original statutes of the College is
      one by which the Bursar is enjoined to distribute in Passion Week thirty
      pieces of silver among the needier scholars &ldquo;for saike of atonynge.&rdquo; The
      meadow adjoining the back of the College has been called from time
      immemorial &ldquo;the Potter&rsquo;s Field.&rdquo; And the name of Salt Cellar is not less
      ancient and significant.
    </p>
    <p>
      Salt Cellar, that grey and green quadrangle visible from the room assigned
      to Zuleika, is very beautiful, as I have said. So tranquil is it as to
      seem remote not merely from the world, but even from Oxford, so deeply is
      it hidden away in the core of Oxford&rsquo;s heart. So tranquil is it, one would
      guess that nothing had ever happened in it. For five centuries these walls
      have stood, and during that time have beheld, one would say, no sight less
      seemly than the good work of weeding, mowing, rolling, that has made, at
      length, so exemplary the lawn. These cloisters that grace the south and
      east sides&mdash;five centuries have passed through them, leaving in them
      no echo, leaving on them no sign, of all that the outer world, for good or
      evil, has been doing so fiercely, so raucously.
    </p>
    <p>
      And yet, if you are versed in the antiquities of Oxford, you know that
      this small, still quadrangle has played its part in the rough-and-tumble
      of history, and has been the background of high passions and strange
      fates. The sun-dial in its midst has told the hours to more than one
      bygone King. Charles I. lay for twelve nights in Judas; and it was here,
      in this very quadrangle, that he heard from the lips of a breathless and
      blood-stained messenger the news of Chalgrove Field. Sixty years later,
      James, his son, came hither, black with threats, and from one of the
      hind-windows of the Warden&rsquo;s house&mdash;maybe, from the very room where
      now Zuleika was changing her frock&mdash;addressed the Fellows, and
      presented to them the Papist by him chosen to be their Warden, instead of
      the Protestant whom they had elected. They were not of so stern a stuff as
      the Fellows of Magdalen, who, despite His Majesty&rsquo;s menaces, had just
      rejected Bishop Farmer. The Papist was elected, there and then, al fresco,
      without dissent. Cannot one see them, these Fellows of Judas, huddled
      together round the sun-dial, like so many sheep in a storm? The King&rsquo;s
      wrath, according to a contemporary record, was so appeased by their
      pliancy that he deigned to lie for two nights in Judas, and at a grand
      refection in Hall &ldquo;was gracious and merrie.&rdquo; Perhaps it was in lingering
      gratitude for such patronage that Judas remained so pious to his memory
      even after smug Herrenhausen had been dumped down on us for ever.
      Certainly, of all the Colleges none was more ardent than Judas for James
      Stuart. Thither it was that young Sir Harry Esson led, under cover of
      night, three-score recruits whom he had enlisted in the surrounding
      villages. The cloisters of Salt Cellar were piled with arms and stores;
      and on its grass&mdash;its sacred grass!&mdash;the squad was incessantly
      drilled, against the good day when Ormond should land his men in Devon.
      For a whole month Salt Cellar was a secret camp. But somehow, at length&mdash;woe
      to &ldquo;lost causes and impossible loyalties&rdquo;&mdash;Herrenhausen had wind of
      it; and one night, when the soldiers of the white cockade lay snoring
      beneath the stars, stealthily the white-faced Warden unbarred his postern&mdash;that
      very postern through which now Zuleika had passed on the way to her
      bedroom&mdash;and stealthily through it, one by one on tip-toe, came the
      King&rsquo;s foot-guards. Not many shots rang out, nor many swords clashed, in
      the night air, before the trick was won for law and order. Most of the
      rebels were overpowered in their sleep; and those who had time to snatch
      arms were too dazed to make good resistance. Sir Harry Esson himself was
      the only one who did not live to be hanged. He had sprung up alert, sword
      in hand, at the first alarm, setting his back to the cloisters. There he
      fought calmly, ferociously, till a bullet went through his chest. &ldquo;By God,
      this College is well-named!&rdquo; were the words he uttered as he fell forward
      and died.
    </p>
    <p>
      Comparatively tame was the scene now being enacted in this place. The
      Duke, with bowed head, was pacing the path between the lawn and the
      cloisters. Two other undergraduates stood watching him, whispering to each
      other, under the archway that leads to the Front Quadrangle. Presently, in
      a sheepish way, they approached him. He halted and looked up.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I say,&rdquo; stammered the spokesman.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well?&rdquo; asked the Duke. Both youths were slightly acquainted with him; but
      he was not used to being spoken to by those whom he had not first
      addressed. Moreover, he was loth to be thus disturbed in his sombre
      reverie. His manner was not encouraging.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t it a lovely day for the Eights?&rdquo; faltered the spokesman.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I conceive,&rdquo; the Duke said, &ldquo;that you hold back some other question.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The spokesman smiled weakly. Nudged by the other, he muttered &ldquo;Ask him
      yourself!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Duke diverted his gaze to the other, who, with an angry look at the
      one, cleared his throat, and said &ldquo;I was going to ask if you thought Miss
      Dobson would come and have luncheon with me to-morrow?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A sister of mine will be there,&rdquo; explained the one, knowing the Duke to
      be a precisian.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you are acquainted with Miss Dobson, a direct invitation should be
      sent to her,&rdquo; said the Duke. &ldquo;If you are not&mdash;&rdquo; The aposiopesis was
      icy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, you see,&rdquo; said the other of the two, &ldquo;that is just the difficulty.
      I AM acquainted with her. But is she acquainted with ME? I met her at
      breakfast this morning, at the Warden&rsquo;s.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So did I,&rdquo; added the one.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But she&mdash;well,&rdquo; continued the other, &ldquo;she didn&rsquo;t take much notice of
      us. She seemed to be in a sort of dream.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah!&rdquo; murmured the Duke, with melancholy interest.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The only time she opened her lips,&rdquo; said the other, &ldquo;was when she asked
      us whether we took tea or coffee.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She put hot milk in my tea,&rdquo; volunteered the one, &ldquo;and upset the cup over
      my hand, and smiled vaguely.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And smiled vaguely,&rdquo; sighed the Duke.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She left us long before the marmalade stage,&rdquo; said the one.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Without a word,&rdquo; said the other.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Without a glance?&rdquo; asked the Duke. It was testified by the one and the
      other that there had been not so much as a glance.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Doubtless,&rdquo; the disingenuous Duke said, &ldquo;she had a headache... Was she
      pale?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very pale,&rdquo; answered the one.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A healthy pallor,&rdquo; qualified the other, who was a constant reader of
      novels.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Did she look,&rdquo; the Duke inquired, &ldquo;as if she had spent a sleepless
      night?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      That was the impression made on both.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yet she did not seem listless or unhappy?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      No, they would not go so far as to say that.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Indeed, were her eyes of an almost unnatural brilliance?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Quite unnatural,&rdquo; confessed the one.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Twin stars,&rdquo; interpolated the other.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Did she, in fact, seem to be consumed by some inward rapture?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Yes, now they came to think of it, this was exactly how she HAD seemed.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was sweet, it was bitter, for the Duke. &ldquo;I remember,&rdquo; Zuleika had said
      to him, &ldquo;nothing that happened to me this morning till I found myself at
      your door.&rdquo; It was bitter-sweet to have that outline filled in by these
      artless pencils. No, it was only bitter, to be, at his time of life,
      living in the past.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The purpose of your tattle?&rdquo; he asked coldly.
    </p>
    <p>
      The two youths hurried to the point from which he had diverted them. &ldquo;When
      she went by with you just now,&rdquo; said the one, &ldquo;she evidently didn&rsquo;t know
      us from Adam.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And I had so hoped to ask her to luncheon,&rdquo; said the other.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, we wondered if you would re-introduce us. And then perhaps...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a pause. The Duke was touched to kindness for these
      fellow-lovers. He would fain preserve them from the anguish that beset
      himself. So humanising is sorrow.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are in love with Miss Dobson?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      Both nodded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;you will in time be thankful to me for not affording you
      further traffic with that lady. To love and be scorned&mdash;does Fate
      hold for us a greater inconvenience? You think I beg the question? Let me
      tell you that I, too, love Miss Dobson, and that she scorns me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      To the implied question &ldquo;What chance would there be for you?&rdquo; the reply
      was obvious.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amazed, abashed, the two youths turned on their heels.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Stay!&rdquo; said the Duke. &ldquo;Let me, in justice to myself, correct an inference
      you may have drawn. It is not by reason of any defect in myself, perceived
      or imagined, that Miss Dobson scorns me. She scorns me simply because I
      love her. All who love her she scorns. To see her is to love her.
      Therefore shut your eyes to her. Strictly exclude her from your horizon.
      Ignore her. Will you do this?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We will try,&rdquo; said the one, after a pause.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Thank you very much,&rdquo; added the other.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Duke watched them out of sight. He wished he could take the good
      advice he had given them... Suppose he did take it! Suppose he went to the
      Bursar, obtained an exeat, fled straight to London! What just humiliation
      for Zuleika to come down and find her captive gone! He pictured her
      staring around the quadrangle, ranging the cloisters, calling to him. He
      pictured her rustling to the gate of the College, inquiring at the
      porter&rsquo;s lodge. &ldquo;His Grace, Miss, he passed through a minute ago. He&rsquo;s
      going down this afternoon.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Yet, even while his fancy luxuriated in this scheme, he well knew that he
      would not accomplish anything of the kind&mdash;knew well that he would
      wait here humbly, eagerly, even though Zuleika lingered over her toilet
      till crack o&rsquo; doom. He had no desire that was not centred in her. Take
      away his love for her, and what remained? Nothing&mdash;though only in the
      past twenty-four hours had this love been added to him. Ah, why had he
      ever seen her? He thought of his past, its cold splendour and insouciance.
      But he knew that for him there was no returning. His boats were burnt. The
      Cytherean babes had set their torches to that flotilla, and it had blazed
      like match-wood. On the isle of the enchantress he was stranded for ever.
      For ever stranded on the isle of an enchantress who would have nothing to
      do with him! What, he wondered, should be done in so piteous a quandary?
      There seemed to be two courses. One was to pine slowly and painfully away.
      The other...
    </p>
    <p>
      Academically, the Duke had often reasoned that a man for whom life holds
      no chance of happiness cannot too quickly shake life off. Now, of a
      sudden, there was for that theory a vivid application.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Whether &lsquo;tis nobler in the mind to suffer&rdquo; was not a point by which he,
      &ldquo;more an antique Roman than a Dane,&rdquo; was at all troubled. Never had he
      given ear to that cackle which is called Public Opinion. The judgment of
      his peers&mdash;this, he had often told himself, was the sole arbitrage he
      could submit to; but then, who was to be on the bench? Peerless, he was
      irresponsible&mdash;the captain of his soul, the despot of his future. No
      injunction but from himself would he bow to; and his own injunctions&mdash;so
      little Danish was he&mdash;had always been peremptory and lucid. Lucid and
      peremptory, now, the command he issued to himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So sorry to have been so long,&rdquo; carolled a voice from above. The Duke
      looked up. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m all but ready,&rdquo; said Zuleika at her window.
    </p>
    <p>
      That brief apparition changed the colour of his resolve. He realised that
      to die for love of this lady would be no mere measure of precaution, or
      counsel of despair. It would be in itself a passionate indulgence&mdash;a
      fiery rapture, not to be foregone. What better could he ask than to die
      for his love? Poor indeed seemed to him now the sacrament of marriage
      beside the sacrament of death. Death was incomparably the greater, the
      finer soul. Death was the one true bridal.
    </p>
    <p>
      He flung back his head, spread wide his arms, quickened his pace almost to
      running speed. Ah, he would win his bride before the setting of the sun.
      He knew not by what means he would win her. Enough that even now,
      full-hearted, fleet-footed, he was on his way to her, and that she heard
      him coming.
    </p>
    <p>
      When Zuleika, a vision in vaporous white, came out through the postern,
      she wondered why he was walking at so remarkable a pace. To him, wildly
      expressing in his movement the thought within him, she appeared as his
      awful bride. With a cry of joy, he bounded towards her, and would have
      caught her in his arms, had she not stepped nimbly aside.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Forgive me!&rdquo; he said, after a pause. &ldquo;It was a mistake&mdash;an idiotic
      mistake of identity. I thought you were...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Zuleika, rigid, asked &ldquo;Have I many doubles?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You know well that in all the world is none so blest as to be like you. I
      can only say that I was over-wrought. I can only say that it shall not
      occur again.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She was very angry indeed. Of his penitence there could be no doubt. But
      there are outrages for which no penitence can atone. This seemed to be one
      of them. Her first impulse was to dismiss the Duke forthwith and for ever.
      But she wanted to show herself at the races. And she could not go alone.
      And except the Duke there was no one to take her. True, there was the
      concert to-night; and she could show herself there to advantage; but she
      wanted ALL Oxford to see her&mdash;see her NOW.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am forgiven?&rdquo; he asked. In her, I am afraid, self-respect outweighed
      charity. &ldquo;I will try,&rdquo; she said merely, &ldquo;to forget what you have done.&rdquo;
       Motioning him to her side, she opened her parasol, and signified her
      readiness to start.
    </p>
    <p>
      They passed together across the vast gravelled expanse of the Front
      Quadrangle. In the porch of the College there were, as usual, some
      chained-up dogs, patiently awaiting their masters. Zuleika, of course, did
      not care for dogs. One has never known a good man to whom dogs were not
      dear; but many of the best women have no such fondness. You will find that
      the woman who is really kind to dogs is always one who has failed to
      inspire sympathy in men. For the attractive woman, dogs are mere dumb and
      restless brutes&mdash;possibly dangerous, certainly soulless. Yet will
      coquetry teach her to caress any dog in the presence of a man enslaved by
      her. Even Zuleika, it seems, was not above this rather obvious device for
      awaking envy. Be sure she did not at all like the look of the very big
      bulldog who was squatting outside the porter&rsquo;s lodge. Perhaps, but for her
      present anger, she would not have stooped endearingly down to him, as she
      did, cooing over him and trying to pat his head. Alas, her pretty act was
      a failure. The bulldog cowered away from her, horrifically grimacing. This
      was strange. Like the majority of his breed, Corker (for such was his
      name) had ever been wistful to be noticed by any one&mdash;effusively
      grateful for every word or pat, an ever-ready wagger and nuzzler, to none
      ineffable. No beggar, no burglar, had ever been rebuffed by this catholic
      beast. But he drew the line at Zuleika.
    </p>
    <p>
      Seldom is even a fierce bulldog heard to growl. Yet Corker growled at
      Zuleika.
    </p>


</section></body></html>
