<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
    <p>
      A few minutes before half-past seven, the Duke, arrayed for dinner, passed
      leisurely up the High. The arresting feature of his costume was a
      mulberry-coloured coat, with brass buttons. This, to any one versed in
      Oxford lore, betokened him a member of the Junta. It is awful to think
      that a casual stranger might have mistaken him for a footman. It does not
      do to think of such things.
    </p>
    <p>
      The tradesmen, at the doors of their shops, bowed low as he passed,
      rubbing their hands and smiling, hoping inwardly that they took no liberty
      in sharing the cool rosy air of the evening with his Grace. They noted
      that he wore in his shirt-front a black pearl and a pink. &ldquo;Daring, but
      becoming,&rdquo; they opined.
    </p>
    <p>
      The rooms of the Junta were over a stationer&rsquo;s shop, next door but one to
      the Mitre. They were small rooms; but as the Junta had now, besides the
      Duke, only two members, and as no member might introduce more than one
      guest, there was ample space.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Duke had been elected in his second term. At that time there were four
      members; but these were all leaving Oxford at the end of the summer term,
      and there seemed to be in the ranks of the Bullingdon and the Loder no one
      quite eligible for the Junta, that holy of holies. Thus it was that the
      Duke inaugurated in solitude his second year of membership. From time to
      time, he proposed and seconded a few candidates, after &ldquo;sounding&rdquo; them as
      to whether they were willing to join. But always, when election evening&mdash;the
      last Tuesday of term&mdash;drew near, he began to have his doubts about
      these fellows. This one was &ldquo;rowdy&rdquo;; that one was over-dressed; another
      did not ride quite straight to hounds; in the pedigree of another a
      bar-sinister was more than suspected. Election evening was always a rather
      melancholy time. After dinner, when the two club servants had placed on
      the mahogany the time-worn Candidates&rsquo; Book and the ballot-box, and had
      noiselessly withdrawn, the Duke, clearing his throat, read aloud to
      himself &ldquo;Mr. So-and-So, of Such-and-Such College, proposed by the Duke of
      Dorset, seconded by the Duke of Dorset,&rdquo; and, in every case, when he drew
      out the drawer of the ballot-box, found it was a black-ball that he had
      dropped into the urn. Thus it was that at the end of the summer term the
      annual photographic &ldquo;group&rdquo; taken by Messrs. Hills and Saunders was a
      presentment of the Duke alone.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the course of his third year he had become less exclusive. Not because
      there seemed to be any one really worthy of the Junta; but because the
      Junta, having thriven since the eighteenth century, must not die. Suppose&mdash;one
      never knew&mdash;he were struck by lightning, the Junta would be no more.
      So, not without reluctance, but unanimously, he had elected The MacQuern,
      of Balliol, and Sir John Marraby, of Brasenose.
    </p>
    <p>
      To-night, as he, a doomed man, went up into the familiar rooms, he was
      wholly glad that he had thus relented. As yet, he was spared the tragic
      knowledge that it would make no difference.*
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   * The Junta has been reconstituted. But the apostolic line was
     broken, the thread was snapped; the old magic is fled.
</pre>
    <p>
      The MacQuern and two other young men were already there.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. President,&rdquo; said The MacQuern, &ldquo;I present Mr. Trent-Garby, of Christ
      Church.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Junta is honoured,&rdquo; said the Duke, bowing.
    </p>
    <p>
      Such was the ritual of the club.
    </p>
    <p>
      The other young man, because his host, Sir John Marraby, was not yet on
      the scene, had no locus standi, and, though a friend of The MacQuern, and
      well known to the Duke, had to be ignored.
    </p>
    <p>
      A moment later, Sir John arrived. &ldquo;Mr. President,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;I present
      Lord Sayes, of Magdalen.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Junta is honoured,&rdquo; said the Duke, bowing.
    </p>
    <p>
      Both hosts and both guests, having been prominent in the throng that
      vociferated around Zuleika an hour earlier, were slightly abashed in the
      Duke&rsquo;s presence. He, however, had not noticed any one in particular, and,
      even if he had, that fine tradition of the club&mdash;&ldquo;A member of the
      Junta can do no wrong; a guest of the Junta cannot err&rdquo;&mdash;would have
      prevented him from showing his displeasure.
    </p>
    <p>
      A Herculean figure filled the doorway.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Junta is honoured,&rdquo; said the Duke, bowing to his guest.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Duke,&rdquo; said the newcomer quietly, &ldquo;the honour is as much mine as that of
      the interesting and ancient institution which I am this night privileged
      to inspect.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Turning to Sir John and The MacQuern, the Duke said &ldquo;I present Mr.
      Abimelech V. Oover, of Trinity.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Junta,&rdquo; they replied, &ldquo;is honoured.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Gentlemen,&rdquo; said the Rhodes Scholar, &ldquo;your good courtesy is just such as
      I would have anticipated from members of the ancient Junta. Like most of
      my countrymen, I am a man of few words. We are habituated out there to act
      rather than talk. Judged from the view-point of your beautiful old
      civilisation, I am aware my curtness must seem crude. But, gentlemen,
      believe me, right here&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dinner is served, your Grace.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Thus interrupted, Mr. Oover, with the resourcefulness of a practised
      orator, brought his thanks to a quick but not abrupt conclusion. The
      little company passed into the front room.
    </p>
    <p>
      Through the window, from the High, fading daylight mingled with the
      candle-light. The mulberry coats of the hosts, interspersed by the black
      ones of the guests, made a fine pattern around the oval table a-gleam with
      the many curious pieces of gold and silver plate that had accrued to the
      Junta in course of years.
    </p>
    <p>
      The President showed much deference to his guest. He seemed to listen with
      close attention to the humorous anecdote with which, in the American
      fashion, Mr. Oover inaugurated dinner.
    </p>
    <p>
      To all Rhodes Scholars, indeed, his courtesy was invariable. He went out
      of his way to cultivate them. And this he did more as a favour to Lord
      Milner than of his own caprice. He found these Scholars, good fellows
      though they were, rather oppressive. They had not&mdash;how could they
      have?&mdash;the undergraduate&rsquo;s virtue of taking Oxford as a matter of
      course. The Germans loved it too little, the Colonials too much. The
      Americans were, to a sensitive observer, the most troublesome&mdash;as
      being the most troubled&mdash;of the whole lot. The Duke was not one of
      those Englishmen who fling, or care to hear flung, cheap sneers at
      America. Whenever any one in his presence said that America was not large
      in area, he would firmly maintain that it was. He held, too, in his
      enlightened way, that Americans have a perfect right to exist. But he did
      often find himself wishing Mr. Rhodes had not enabled them to exercise
      that right in Oxford. They were so awfully afraid of having their
      strenuous native characters undermined by their delight in the place. They
      held that the future was theirs, a glorious asset, far more glorious than
      the past. But a theory, as the Duke saw, is one thing, an emotion another.
      It is so much easier to covet what one hasn&rsquo;t than to revel in what one
      has. Also, it is so much easier to be enthusiastic about what exists than
      about what doesn&rsquo;t. The future doesn&rsquo;t exist. The past does. For, whereas
      all men can learn, the gift of prophecy has died out. A man cannot work up
      in his breast any real excitement about what possibly won&rsquo;t happen. He
      cannot very well help being sentimentally interested in what he knows has
      happened. On the other hand, he owes a duty to his country. And, if his
      country be America, he ought to try to feel a vivid respect for the
      future, and a cold contempt for the past. Also, if he be selected by his
      country as a specimen of the best moral, physical, and intellectual type
      that she can produce for the astounding of the effete foreigner, and
      incidentally for the purpose of raising that foreigner&rsquo;s tone, he must&mdash;mustn&rsquo;t
      he?&mdash;do his best to astound, to exalt. But then comes in this
      difficulty. Young men don&rsquo;t like to astound and exalt their fellows. And
      Americans, individually, are of all people the most anxious to please.
      That they talk overmuch is often taken as a sign of self-satisfaction. It
      is merely a mannerism. Rhetoric is a thing inbred in them. They are quite
      unconscious of it. It is as natural to them as breathing. And, while they
      talk on, they really do believe that they are a quick, businesslike
      people, by whom things are &ldquo;put through&rdquo; with an almost brutal abruptness.
      This notion of theirs is rather confusing to the patient English auditor.
    </p>
    <p>
      Altogether, the American Rhodes Scholars, with their splendid native gift
      of oratory, and their modest desire to please, and their not less evident
      feeling that they ought merely to edify, and their constant delight in all
      that of Oxford their English brethren don&rsquo;t notice, and their constant
      fear that they are being corrupted, are a noble, rather than a
      comfortable, element in the social life of the University. So, at least,
      they seemed to the Duke.
    </p>
    <p>
      And to-night, but that he had invited Oover to dine with him, he could
      have been dining with Zuleika. And this was his last dinner on earth. Such
      thoughts made him the less able to take pleasure in his guest. Perfect,
      however, the amenity of his manner.
    </p>
    <p>
      This was the more commendable because Oover&rsquo;s &ldquo;aura&rdquo; was even more
      disturbing than that of the average Rhodes Scholar. To-night, besides the
      usual conflicts in this young man&rsquo;s bosom, raged a special one between his
      desire to behave well and his jealousy of the man who had to-day been Miss
      Dobson&rsquo;s escort. In theory he denied the Duke&rsquo;s right to that honour. In
      sentiment he admitted it. Another conflict, you see. And another. He
      longed to orate about the woman who had his heart; yet she was the one
      topic that must be shirked.
    </p>
    <p>
      The MacQuern and Mr. Trent-Garby, Sir John Marraby and Lord Sayes, they
      too&mdash;though they were no orators&mdash;would fain have unpacked their
      hearts in words about Zuleika. They spoke of this and that, automatically,
      none listening to another&mdash;each man listening, wide-eyed, to his own
      heart&rsquo;s solo on the Zuleika theme, and drinking rather more champagne than
      was good for him. Maybe, these youths sowed in themselves, on this night,
      the seeds of lifelong intemperance. We cannot tell. They did not live long
      enough for us to know.
    </p>
    <p>
      While the six dined, a seventh, invisible to them, leaned moodily against
      the mantel-piece, watching them. He was not of their time. His long brown
      hair was knotted in a black riband behind. He wore a pale brocaded coat
      and lace ruffles, silken stockings, a sword. Privy to their doom, he
      watched them. He was loth that his Junta must die. Yes, his. Could the
      diners have seen him, they would have known him by his resemblance to the
      mezzotint portrait that hung on the wall above him. They would have risen
      to their feet in presence of Humphrey Greddon, founder and first president
      of the club.
    </p>
    <p>
      His face was not so oval, nor were his eyes so big, nor his lips so full,
      nor his hands so delicate, as they appeared in the mezzotint. Yet (bating
      the conventions of eighteenth-century portraiture) the likeness was a good
      one. Humphrey Greddon was not less well-knit and graceful than the painter
      had made him, and, hard though the lines of the face were, there was about
      him a certain air of high romance that could not be explained away by the
      fact that he was of a period not our own. You could understand the great
      love that Nellie O&rsquo;Mora had borne him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Under the mezzotint hung Hoppner&rsquo;s miniature of that lovely and
      ill-starred girl, with her soft dark eyes, and her curls all astray from
      beneath her little blue turban. And the Duke was telling Mr. Oover her
      story&mdash;how she had left her home for Humphrey Greddon when she was
      but sixteen, and he an undergraduate at Christ Church; and had lived for
      him in a cottage at Littlemore, whither he would ride, most days, to be
      with her; and how he tired of her, broke his oath that he would marry her,
      thereby broke her heart; and how she drowned herself in a mill-pond; and
      how Greddon was killed in Venice, two years later, duelling on the Riva
      Schiavoni with a Senator whose daughter he had seduced.
    </p>
    <p>
      And he, Greddon, was not listening very attentively to the tale. He had
      heard it told so often in this room, and he did not understand the
      sentiments of the modern world. Nellie had been a monstrous pretty
      creature. He had adored her, and had done with her. It was right that she
      should always be toasted after dinner by the Junta, as in the days when
      first he loved her&mdash;&ldquo;Here&rsquo;s to Nellie O&rsquo;Mora, the fairest witch that
      ever was or will be!&rdquo; He would have resented the omission of that toast.
      But he was sick of the pitying, melting looks that were always cast
      towards her miniature. Nellie had been beautiful, but, by God! she was
      always a dunce and a simpleton. How could he have spent his life with her?
      She was a fool, by God! not to marry that fool Trailby, of Merton, whom he
      took to see her.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Oover&rsquo;s moral tone, and his sense of chivalry, were of the American
      kind: far higher than ours, even, and far better expressed. Whereas the
      English guests of the Junta, when they heard the tale of Nellie O&rsquo;Mora,
      would merely murmur &ldquo;Poor girl!&rdquo; or &ldquo;What a shame!&rdquo; Mr. Oover said in a
      tone of quiet authority that compelled Greddon&rsquo;s ear &ldquo;Duke, I hope I am
      not incognisant of the laws that govern the relations of guest and host.
      But, Duke, I aver deliberately that the founder of this fine old club; at
      which you are so splendidly entertaining me to-night, was an unmitigated
      scoundrel. I say he was not a white man.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At the word &ldquo;scoundrel,&rdquo; Humphrey Greddon had sprung forward, drawing his
      sword, and loudly, in a voice audible to himself alone, challenged the
      American to make good his words. Then, as this gentleman took no notice,
      with one clean straight thrust Greddon ran him through the heart, shouting
      &ldquo;Die, you damned psalm-singer and traducer! And so die all rebels against
      King George!&rdquo;* Withdrawing the blade, he wiped it daintily on his cambric
      handkerchief. There was no blood. Mr. Oover, with unpunctured shirt-front,
      was repeating &ldquo;I say he was not a white man.&rdquo; And Greddon remembered
      himself&mdash;remembered he was only a ghost, impalpable, impotent, of no
      account. &ldquo;But I shall meet you in Hell to-morrow,&rdquo; he hissed in Oover&rsquo;s
      face. And there he was wrong. It is quite certain that Oover went to
      Heaven.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   * As Edward VII. was at this time on the throne, it must have been
     to George III. that Mr. Greddon was referring.
</pre>
    <p>
      Unable to avenge himself, Greddon had looked to the Duke to act for him.
      When he saw that this young man did but smile at Oover and make a vague
      deprecatory gesture, he again, in his wrath, forgot his disabilities.
      Drawing himself to his full height, he took with great deliberation a
      pinch of snuff, and, bowing low to the Duke, said &ldquo;I am vastly obleeged to
      your Grace for the fine high Courage you have exhibited in the behalf of
      your most Admiring, most Humble Servant.&rdquo; Then, having brushed away a
      speck of snuff from his jabot, he turned on his heel; and only in the
      doorway, where one of the club servants, carrying a decanter in each hand,
      walked straight through him, did he realise that he had not spoilt the
      Duke&rsquo;s evening. With a volley of the most appalling eighteenth-century
      oaths, he passed back into the nether world.
    </p>
    <p>
      To the Duke, Nellie O&rsquo;Mora had never been a very vital figure. He had
      often repeated the legend of her. But, having never known what love was,
      he could not imagine her rapture or her anguish. Himself the quarry of all
      Mayfair&rsquo;s wise virgins, he had always&mdash;so far as he thought of the
      matter at all&mdash;suspected that Nellie&rsquo;s death was due to thwarted
      ambition. But to-night, while he told Oover about her, he could see into
      her soul. Nor did he pity her. She had loved. She had known the one thing
      worth living for&mdash;and dying for. She, as she went down to the
      mill-pond, had felt just that ecstasy of self-sacrifice which he himself
      had felt to-day and would feel to-morrow. And for a while, too&mdash;for a
      full year&mdash;she had known the joy of being loved, had been for Greddon
      &ldquo;the fairest witch that ever was or will be.&rdquo; He could not agree with
      Oover&rsquo;s long disquisition on her sufferings. And, glancing at her
      well-remembered miniature, he wondered just what it was in her that had
      captivated Greddon. He was in that blest state when a man cannot believe
      the earth has been trodden by any really beautiful or desirable lady save
      the lady of his own heart.
    </p>
    <p>
      The moment had come for the removal of the table-cloth. The mahogany of
      the Junta was laid bare&mdash;a clear dark lake, anon to reflect in its
      still and ruddy depths the candelabras and the fruit-cradles, the slender
      glasses and the stout old decanters, the forfeit-box and the snuff-box,
      and other paraphernalia of the dignity of dessert. Lucidly, and
      unwaveringly inverted in the depths these good things stood; and, so soon
      as the wine had made its circuit, the Duke rose and with uplifted glass
      proposed the first of the two toasts traditional to the Junta. &ldquo;Gentlemen,
      I give you Church and State.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The toast having been honoured by all&mdash;and by none with a richer
      reverence than by Oover, despite his passionate mental reservation in
      favour of Pittsburg-Anabaptism and the Republican Ideal&mdash;the
      snuff-box was handed round, and fruit was eaten.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently, when the wine had gone round again, the Duke rose and with
      uplifted glass said &ldquo;Gentlemen, I give you&mdash;&rdquo; and there halted.
      Silent, frowning, flushed, he stood for a few moments, and then, with a
      deliberate gesture, tilted his glass and let fall the wine to the carpet.
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; he said, looking round the table, &ldquo;I cannot give you Nellie O&rsquo;Mora.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why not?&rdquo; gasped Sir John Marraby.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have a right to ask that,&rdquo; said the Duke, still standing. &ldquo;I can only
      say that my conscience is stronger than my sense of what is due to the
      customs of the club. Nellie O&rsquo;Mora,&rdquo; he said, passing his hand over his
      brow, &ldquo;may have been in her day the fairest witch that ever was&mdash;so
      fair that our founder had good reason to suppose her the fairest witch
      that ever would be. But his prediction was a false one. So at least it
      seems to me. Of course I cannot both hold this view and remain President
      of this club. MacQuern&mdash;Marraby&mdash;which of you is
      Vice-President?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He is,&rdquo; said Marraby.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then, MacQuern, you are hereby President, vice myself resigned. Take the
      chair and propose the toast.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I would rather not,&rdquo; said The MacQuern after a pause.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then, Marraby, YOU must.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not I!&rdquo; said Marraby.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why is this?&rdquo; asked the Duke, looking from one to the other.
    </p>
    <p>
      The MacQuern, with Scotch caution, was silent. But the impulsive Marraby&mdash;Madcap
      Marraby, as they called him in B.N.C.&mdash;said &ldquo;It&rsquo;s because I won&rsquo;t
      lie!&rdquo; and, leaping up, raised his glass aloft and cried &ldquo;I give you
      Zuleika Dobson, the fairest witch that ever was or will be!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Oover, Lord Sayes, Mr. Trent-Garby, sprang to their feet; The MacQuern
      rose to his. &ldquo;Zuleika Dobson!&rdquo; they cried, and drained their glasses.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then, when they had resumed their seats, came an awkward pause. The Duke,
      still erect beside the chair he had vacated, looked very grave and pale.
      Marraby had taken an outrageous liberty. But &ldquo;a member of the Junta can do
      no wrong,&rdquo; and the liberty could not be resented. The Duke felt that the
      blame was on himself, who had elected Marraby to the club.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Oover, too, looked grave. All the antiquarian in him deplored the
      sudden rupture of a fine old Oxford tradition. All the chivalrous American
      in him resented the slight on that fair victim of the feudal system, Miss
      O&rsquo;Mora. And, at the same time, all the Abimelech V. in him rejoiced at
      having honoured by word and act the one woman in the world.
    </p>
    <p>
      Gazing around at the flushed faces and heaving shirt-fronts of the diners,
      the Duke forgot Marraby&rsquo;s misdemeanour. What mattered far more to him was
      that here were five young men deeply under the spell of Zuleika. They must
      be saved, if possible. He knew how strong his influence was in the
      University. He knew also how strong was Zuleika&rsquo;s. He had not much hope of
      the issue. But his new-born sense of duty to his fellows spurred him on.
      &ldquo;Is there,&rdquo; he asked with a bitter smile, &ldquo;any one of you who doesn&rsquo;t with
      his whole heart love Miss Dobson?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Nobody held up a hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;As I feared,&rdquo; said the Duke, knowing not that if a hand had been held up
      he would have taken it as a personal insult. No man really in love can
      forgive another for not sharing his ardour. His jealousy for himself when
      his beloved prefers another man is hardly a stronger passion than his
      jealousy for her when she is not preferred to all other women.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You know her only by sight&mdash;by repute?&rdquo; asked the Duke. They
      signified that this was so. &ldquo;I wish you would introduce me to her,&rdquo; said
      Marraby.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are all coming to the Judas concert tonight?&rdquo; the Duke asked,
      ignoring Marraby. &ldquo;You have all secured tickets?&rdquo; They nodded. &ldquo;To hear me
      play, or to see Miss Dobson?&rdquo; There was a murmur of &ldquo;Both&mdash;both.&rdquo;
       &ldquo;And you would all of you, like Marraby, wish to be presented to this
      lady?&rdquo; Their eyes dilated. &ldquo;That way happiness lies, think you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, happiness be hanged!&rdquo; said Marraby.
    </p>
    <p>
      To the Duke this seemed a profoundly sane remark&mdash;an epitome of his
      own sentiments. But what was right for himself was not right for all. He
      believed in convention as the best way for average mankind. And so,
      slowly, calmly, he told to his fellow-diners just what he had told a few
      hours earlier to those two young men in Salt Cellar. Not knowing that his
      words had already been spread throughout Oxford, he was rather surprised
      that they seemed to make no sensation. Quite flat, too, fell his appeal
      that the syren be shunned by all.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Oover, during his year of residence, had been sorely tried by the
      quaint old English custom of not making public speeches after private
      dinners. It was with a deep sigh of satisfaction that he now rose to his
      feet.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Duke,&rdquo; he said in a low voice, which yet penetrated to every corner of
      the room, &ldquo;I guess I am voicing these gentlemen when I say that your words
      show up your good heart, all the time. Your mentality, too, is bully, as
      we all predicate. One may say without exaggeration that your scholarly and
      social attainments are a by-word throughout the solar system, and be-yond.
      We rightly venerate you as our boss. Sir, we worship the ground you walk
      on. But we owe a duty to our own free and independent manhood. Sir, we
      worship the ground Miss Z. Dobson treads on. We have pegged out a claim
      right there. And from that location we aren&rsquo;t to be budged&mdash;not for
      bob-nuts. We asseverate we squat&mdash;where&mdash;we&mdash;squat, come&mdash;what&mdash;will.
      You say we have no chance to win Miss Z. Dobson. That&mdash;we&mdash;know.
      We aren&rsquo;t worthy. We lie prone. Let her walk over us. You say her heart is
      cold. We don&rsquo;t pro-fess we can take the chill off. But, Sir, we can&rsquo;t be
      diverted out of loving her&mdash;not even by you, Sir. No, Sir! We love
      her, and&mdash;shall, and&mdash;will, Sir, with&mdash;our&mdash;latest
      breath.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      This peroration evoked loud applause. &ldquo;I love her, and shall, and will,&rdquo;
       shouted each man. And again they honoured in wine her image. Sir John
      Marraby uttered a cry familiar in the hunting-field. The MacQuern
      contributed a few bars of a sentimental ballad in the dialect of his
      country. &ldquo;Hurrah, hurrah!&rdquo; shouted Mr. Trent-Garby. Lord Sayes hummed the
      latest waltz, waving his arms to its rhythm, while the wine he had just
      spilt on his shirt-front trickled unheeded to his waistcoat. Mr. Oover
      gave the Yale cheer.
    </p>
    <p>
      The genial din was wafted down through the open window to the passers-by.
      The wine-merchant across the way heard it, and smiled pensively. &ldquo;Youth,
      youth!&rdquo; he murmured.
    </p>
    <p>
      The genial din grew louder.
    </p>
    <p>
      At any other time, the Duke would have been jarred by the disgrace to the
      Junta. But now, as he stood with bent head, covering his face with his
      hands, he thought only of the need to rid these young men, here and now,
      of the influence that had befallen them. To-morrow his tragic example
      might be too late, the mischief have sunk too deep, the agony be
      life-long. His good breeding forbade him to cast over a dinner-table the
      shadow of his death. His conscience insisted that he must. He uncovered
      his face, and held up one hand for silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We are all of us,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;old enough to remember vividly the
      demonstrations made in the streets of London when war was declared between
      us and the Transvaal Republic. You, Mr. Oover, doubtless heard in America
      the echoes of those ebullitions. The general idea was that the war was
      going to be a very brief and simple affair&mdash;what was called &lsquo;a
      walk-over.&rsquo; To me, though I was only a small boy, it seemed that all this
      delirious pride in the prospect of crushing a trumpery foe argued a defect
      in our sense of proportion. Still, I was able to understand the
      demonstrators&rsquo; point of view. To &lsquo;the giddy vulgar&rsquo; any sort of victory is
      pleasant. But defeat? If, when that war was declared, every one had been
      sure that not only should we fail to conquer the Transvaal, but that IT
      would conquer US&mdash;that not only would it make good its freedom and
      independence, but that we should forfeit ours&mdash;how would the cits
      have felt then? Would they not have pulled long faces, spoken in whispers,
      wept? You must forgive me for saying that the noise you have just made
      around this table was very like to the noise made on the verge of the Boer
      War. And your procedure seems to me as unaccountable as would have seemed
      the antics of those mobs if England had been plainly doomed to disaster
      and to vassalage. My guest here to-night, in the course of his very
      eloquent and racy speech, spoke of the need that he and you should
      preserve your &lsquo;free and independent manhood.&rsquo; That seemed to me an
      irreproachable ideal. But I confess I was somewhat taken aback by my
      friend&rsquo;s scheme for realising it. He declared his intention of lying prone
      and letting Miss Dobson &lsquo;walk over&rsquo; him; and he advised you to follow his
      example; and to this counsel you gave evident approval. Gentlemen, suppose
      that on the verge of the aforesaid war, some orator had said to the
      British people &lsquo;It is going to be a walk-over for our enemy in the field.
      Mr. Kruger holds us in the hollow of his hand. In subjection to him we
      shall find our long-lost freedom and independence&rsquo;&mdash;what would have
      been Britannia&rsquo;s answer? What, on reflection, is yours to Mr. Oover? What
      are Mr. Oover&rsquo;s own second thoughts?&rdquo; The Duke paused, with a smile to his
      guest.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Go right ahead, Duke,&rdquo; said Mr. Oover. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll re-ply when my turn comes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And not utterly demolish me, I hope,&rdquo; said the Duke. His was the Oxford
      manner. &ldquo;Gentlemen,&rdquo; he continued, &ldquo;is it possible that Britannia would
      have thrown her helmet in the air, shrieking &lsquo;Slavery for ever&rsquo;? You,
      gentlemen, seem to think slavery a pleasant and an honourable state. You
      have less experience of it than I. I have been enslaved to Miss Dobson
      since yesterday evening; you, only since this afternoon; I, at close
      quarters; you, at a respectful distance. Your fetters have not galled you
      yet. MY wrists, MY ankles, are excoriated. The iron has entered into my
      soul. I droop. I stumble. Blood flows from me. I quiver and curse. I
      writhe. The sun mocks me. The moon titters in my face. I can stand it no
      longer. I will no more of it. Tomorrow I die.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The flushed faces of the diners grew gradually pale. Their eyes lost
      lustre. Their tongues clove to the roofs of their mouths.
    </p>
    <p>
      At length, almost inaudibly, The MacQuern asked &ldquo;Do you mean you are going
      to commit suicide?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; said the Duke, &ldquo;if you choose to put it in that way. Yes. And it is
      only by a chance that I did not commit suicide this afternoon.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&mdash;don&rsquo;t&mdash;say,&rdquo; gasped Mr. Oover.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do indeed,&rdquo; said the Duke. &ldquo;And I ask you all to weigh well my
      message.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But&mdash;but does Miss Dobson know?&rdquo; asked Sir John.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh yes,&rdquo; was the reply. &ldquo;Indeed, it was she who persuaded me not to die
      till to-morrow.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But&mdash;but,&rdquo; faltered Lord Sayes, &ldquo;I saw her saying good-bye to you in
      Judas Street. And&mdash;and she looked quite&mdash;as if nothing had
      happened.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nothing HAD happened,&rdquo; said the Duke. &ldquo;And she was very much pleased to
      have me still with her. But she isn&rsquo;t so cruel as to hinder me from dying
      for her to-morrow. I don&rsquo;t think she exactly fixed the hour. It shall be
      just after the Eights have been rowed. An earlier death would mark in me a
      lack of courtesy to that contest... It seems strange to you that I should
      do this thing? Take warning by me. Muster all your will-power, and forget
      Miss Dobson. Tear up your tickets for the concert. Stay here and play
      cards. Play high. Or rather, go back to your various Colleges, and speed
      the news I have told you. Put all Oxford on its guard against this woman
      who can love no lover. Let all Oxford know that I, Dorset, who had so much
      reason to love life&mdash;I, the nonpareil&mdash;am going to die for the
      love I bear this woman. And let no man think I go unwilling. I am no lamb
      led to the slaughter. I am priest as well as victim. I offer myself up
      with a pious joy. But enough of this cold Hebraism! It is ill-attuned to
      my soul&rsquo;s mood. Self-sacrifice&mdash;bah! Regard me as a voluptuary. I am
      that. All my baffled ardour speeds me to the bosom of Death. She is gentle
      and wanton. She knows I could never have loved her for her own sake. She
      has no illusions about me. She knows well I come to her because not
      otherwise may I quench my passion.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a long silence. The Duke, looking around at the bent heads and
      drawn mouths of his auditors, saw that his words had gone home. It was
      Marraby who revealed how powerfully home they had gone.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dorset,&rdquo; he said huskily, &ldquo;I shall die too.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Duke flung up his hands, staring wildly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I stand in with that,&rdquo; said Mr. Oover.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So do I!&rdquo; said Lord Sayes. &ldquo;And I!&rdquo; said Mr. Trent-Garby; &ldquo;And I!&rdquo; The
      MacQuern.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Duke found voice. &ldquo;Are you mad?&rdquo; he asked, clutching at his throat.
      &ldquo;Are you all mad?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, Duke,&rdquo; said Mr. Oover. &ldquo;Or, if we are, you have no right to be at
      large. You have shown us the way. We&mdash;take it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Just so,&rdquo; said The MacQuern, stolidly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Listen, you fools,&rdquo; cried the Duke. But through the open window came the
      vibrant stroke of some clock. He wheeled round, plucked out his watch&mdash;nine!&mdash;the
      concert!&mdash;his promise not to be late!&mdash;Zuleika!
    </p>
    <p>
      All other thoughts vanished. In an instant he dodged beneath the sash of
      the window. From the flower-box he sprang to the road beneath. (The facade
      of the house is called, to this day, Dorset&rsquo;s Leap.) Alighting with the
      legerity of a cat, he swerved leftward in the recoil, and was off, like a
      streak of mulberry-coloured lightning, down the High.
    </p>
    <p>
      The other men had rushed to the window, fearing the worst. &ldquo;No,&rdquo; cried
      Oover. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s all right. Saves time!&rdquo; and he raised himself on to the
      window-box. It splintered under his weight. He leapt heavily but well,
      followed by some uprooted geraniums. Squaring his shoulders, he threw back
      his head, and doubled down the slope.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a violent jostle between the remaining men. The MacQuern cannily
      got out of it, and rushed downstairs. He emerged at the front-door just
      after Marraby touched ground. The Baronet&rsquo;s left ankle had twisted under
      him. His face was drawn with pain as he hopped down the High on his right
      foot, fingering his ticket for the concert. Next leapt Lord Sayes. And
      last of all leapt Mr. Trent-Garby, who, catching his foot in the ruined
      flower-box, fell headlong, and was, I regret to say, killed. Lord Sayes
      passed Sir John in a few paces. The MacQuern overtook Mr. Oover at St.
      Mary&rsquo;s and outstripped him in Radcliffe Square. The Duke came in an easy
      first.
    </p>
    <p>
      Youth, youth!
    </p>


</section></body></html>
