<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 23</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIII</h2>
    <p>
      Twisting and turning in her flight, with wild eyes that fearfully retained
      the image of that small man gathering himself to spring, Zuleika found
      herself suddenly where she could no further go.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was in that grim ravine by which you approach New College. At sight of
      the great shut gate before her, she halted, and swerved to the wall. She
      set her brow and the palms of her hands against the cold stones. She threw
      back her head, and beat the stones with her fists.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was not only what she had seen, it was what she had barely saved
      herself from seeing, and what she had not quite saved herself from
      hearing, that she strove so piteously to forget. She was sorrier for
      herself, angrier, than she had been last night when the Duke laid hands on
      her. Why should every day have a horrible ending? Last night she had
      avenged herself. To-night&rsquo;s outrage was all the more foul and mean because
      of its certain immunity. And the fact that she had in some measure brought
      it on herself did but whip her rage. What a fool she had been to taunt the
      man! Yet no, how could she have foreseen that he would&mdash;do THAT? How
      could she have guessed that he, who had not dared seemly death for her in
      the gentle river, would dare&mdash;THAT?
    </p>
    <p>
      She shuddered the more as she now remembered that this very day, in that
      very house, she had invited for her very self a similar fate. What if the
      Duke had taken her word? Strange! she wouldn&rsquo;t have flinched then. She had
      felt no horror at the notion of such a death. And thus she now saw Noaks&rsquo;
      conduct in a new light&mdash;saw that he had but wished to prove his love,
      not at all to affront her. This understanding quickly steadied her nerves.
      She did not need now to forget what she had seen; and, not needing to
      forget it&mdash;thus are our brains fashioned&mdash;she was able to forget
      it.
    </p>
    <p>
      But by removal of one load her soul was but bared for a more grievous
      other. Her memory harked back to what had preceded the crisis. She
      recalled those moments of doomed rapture in which her heart had soared up
      to the apocalyptic window&mdash;recalled how, all the while she was
      speaking to the man there, she had been chafed by the inadequacy of
      language. Oh, how much more she had meant than she could express! Oh, the
      ecstasy of that self-surrender! And the brevity of it! the sudden odious
      awakening! Thrice in this Oxford she had been duped. Thrice all that was
      fine and sweet in her had leapt forth, only to be scourged back into
      hiding. Poor heart inhibited! She gazed about her. The stone alley she had
      come into, the terrible shut gate, were for her a visible symbol of the
      destiny she had to put up with. Wringing her hands, she hastened along the
      way she had come. She vowed she would never again set foot in Oxford. She
      wished herself out of the hateful little city to-night. She even wished
      herself dead.
    </p>
    <p>
      She deserved to suffer, you say? Maybe. I merely state that she did
      suffer.
    </p>
    <p>
      Emerging into Catherine Street, she knew whereabouts she was, and made
      straight for Judas, turning away her eyes as she skirted the Broad, that
      place of mocked hopes and shattered ideals.
    </p>
    <p>
      Coming into Judas Street, she remembered the scene of yesterday&mdash;the
      happy man with her, the noise of the vast happy crowd. She suffered in a
      worse form what she had suffered in the gallery of the Hall. For now&mdash;did
      I not say she was not without imagination?&mdash;her self-pity was
      sharpened by remorse for the hundreds of homes robbed. She realised the
      truth of what the poor Duke had once said to her: she was a danger in the
      world... Aye, and all the more dire now. What if the youth of all Europe
      were moved by Oxford&rsquo;s example? That was a horribly possible thing. It
      must be reckoned with. It must be averted. She must not show herself to
      men. She must find some hiding-place, and there abide. Were this a
      hardship? she asked herself. Was she not sickened for ever of men&rsquo;s
      homage? And was it not clear now that the absorbing need in her soul, the
      need to love, would never&mdash;except for a brief while, now and then,
      and by an unfortunate misunderstanding&mdash;be fulfilled?
    </p>
    <p>
      So long ago that you may not remember, I compared her favourably with the
      shepherdess Marcella, and pleaded her capacity for passion as an excuse
      for her remaining at large. I hope you will now, despite your rather
      evident animus against her, set this to her credit: that she did, so soon
      as she realised the hopelessness of her case, make just that decision
      which I blamed Marcella for not making at the outset. It was as she stood
      on the Warden&rsquo;s door-step that she decided to take the veil.
    </p>
    <p>
      With something of a conventual hush in her voice, she said to the butler,
      &ldquo;Please tell my maid that we are leaving by a very early train to-morrow,
      and that she must pack my things to-night.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well, Miss,&rdquo; said the butler. &ldquo;The Warden,&rdquo; he added, &ldquo;is in the
      study, Miss, and was asking for you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She could face her grandfather without a tremour&mdash;now. She would hear
      meekly whatever reproaches he might have for her, but their sting was
      already drawn by the surprise she had in store for him.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was he who seemed a trifle nervous. In his
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, did you come and peep down from the gallery?&rdquo; there was a distinct
      tremour.
    </p>
    <p>
      Throwing aside her cloak, she went quickly to him, and laid a hand on the
      lapel of his coat. &ldquo;Poor grand-papa!&rdquo; she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nonsense, my dear child,&rdquo; he replied, disengaging himself. &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t give
      it a thought. If the young men chose to be so silly as to stay away, I&mdash;I&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Grand-papa, haven&rsquo;t you been told YET?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Told? I am a Gallio for such follies. I didn&rsquo;t inquire.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But (forgive me, grand-papa, if I seem to you, for the moment, pert) you
      are Warden here. It is your duty, even your privilege, to GUARD. Is it
      not? Well, I grant you the adage that it is useless to bolt the stable
      door when the horse has been stolen. But what shall be said of the ostler
      who doesn&rsquo;t know&mdash;won&rsquo;t even &lsquo;inquire&rsquo; whether&mdash;the horse HAS
      been stolen, grand-papa?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You speak in riddles, Zuleika.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I wish with all my heart I need not tell you the answers. I think I have
      a very real grievance against your staff&mdash;or whatever it is you call
      your subordinates here. I go so far as to dub them dodderers. And I shall
      the better justify that term by not shirking the duty they have left
      undone. The reason why there were no undergraduates in your Hall to-night
      is that they were all dead.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dead?&rdquo; he gasped. &ldquo;Dead? It is disgraceful that I was not told. What did
      they die of?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes. I am an epidemic, grand-papa, a scourge, such as the world has not
      known. Those young men drowned themselves for love of me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He came towards her. &ldquo;Do you realise, girl, what this means to me? I am an
      old man. For more than half a century I have known this College. To it,
      when my wife died, I gave all that there was of heart left in me. For
      thirty years I have been Warden; and in that charge has been all my pride.
      I have had no thought but for this great College, its honour and
      prosperity. More than once lately have I asked myself whether my eyes were
      growing dim, my hand less steady. &lsquo;No&rsquo; was my answer, and again &lsquo;No.&rsquo; And
      thus it is that I have lingered on to let Judas be struck down from its
      high eminence, shamed in the eyes of England&mdash;a College for ever
      tainted, and of evil omen.&rdquo; He raised his head. &ldquo;The disgrace to myself is
      nothing. I care not how parents shall rage against me, and the Heads of
      other Colleges make merry over my decrepitude. It is because you have
      wrought the downfall of Judas that I am about to lay my undying curse on
      you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You mustn&rsquo;t do that!&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;It would be a sort of sacrilege. I am
      going to be a nun. Besides, why should you? I can quite well understand
      your feeling for Judas. But how is Judas more disgraced than any other
      College? If it were only the Judas undergraduates who had&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There were others?&rdquo; cried the Warden. &ldquo;How many?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All. All the boys from all the Colleges.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The Warden heaved a deep sigh. &ldquo;Of course,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;this changes the
      aspect of the whole matter. I wish you had made it clear at once. You gave
      me a very great shock,&rdquo; he said sinking into his arm-chair, &ldquo;and I have
      not yet recovered. You must study the art of exposition.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That will depend on the rules of the convent.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, I forgot that you were going into a convent. Anglican, I hope?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Anglican, she supposed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;As a young man,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;I saw much of dear old Dr. Pusey. It might
      have somewhat reconciled him to my marriage if he had known that my
      grand-daughter would take the veil.&rdquo; He adjusted his glasses, and looked
      at her. &ldquo;Are you sure you have a vocation?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes. I want to be out of the world. I want to do no more harm.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He eyed her musingly. &ldquo;That,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;is rather a revulsion than a
      vocation. I remember that I ventured to point out to Dr. Pusey the
      difference between those two things, when he was almost persuading me to
      enter a Brotherhood founded by one of his friends. It may be that the
      world would be well rid of you, my dear child. But it is not the world
      only that we must consider. Would you grace the recesses of the Church?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I could but try,&rdquo; said Zuleika.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;You could but try&rsquo; are the very words Dr. Pusey used to me. I ventured
      to say that in such a matter effort itself was a stigma of unfitness. For
      all my moods of revulsion, I knew that my place was in the world. I stayed
      there.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But suppose, grand-papa&rdquo;&mdash;and, seeing in fancy the vast agitated
      flotilla of crinolines, she could not forbear a smile&mdash;&ldquo;suppose all
      the young ladies of that period had drowned themselves for love of you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Her smile seemed to nettle the Warden. &ldquo;I was greatly admired,&rdquo; he said.
      &ldquo;Greatly,&rdquo; he repeated.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you liked that, grand-papa?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, my dear. Yes, I am afraid I did. But I never encouraged it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your own heart was never touched?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Never, until I met Laura Frith.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who was she?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She was my future wife.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And how was it you singled her out from the rest? Was she very
      beautiful?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No. It cannot be said that she was beautiful. Indeed, she was accounted
      plain. I think it was her great dignity that attracted me. She did not
      smile archly at me, nor shake her ringlets. In those days it was the
      fashion for young ladies to embroider slippers for such men in holy orders
      as best pleased their fancy. I received hundreds&mdash;thousands&mdash;of
      such slippers. But never a pair from Laura Frith.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She did not love you?&rdquo; asked Zuleika, who had seated herself on the floor
      at her grandfather&rsquo;s feet.
    </p>
    <p>
      I concluded that she did not. It interested me very greatly. It fired me.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Was she incapable of love?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, it was notorious in her circle that she had loved often, but loved in
      vain.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why did she marry you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think she was fatigued by my importunities. She was not very strong.
      But it may be that she married me out of pique. She never told me. I did
      not inquire.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yet you were very happy with her?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;While she lived, I was ideally happy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The young woman stretched out a hand, and laid it on the clasped hands of
      the old man. He sat gazing into the past. She was silent for a while; and
      in her eyes, still fixed intently on his face, there were tears.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Grand-papa dear&rdquo;&mdash;but there were tears in her voice, too.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My child, you don&rsquo;t understand. If I had needed pity&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do understand&mdash;so well. I wasn&rsquo;t pitying you, dear, I was envying
      you a little.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Me?&mdash;an old man with only the remembrance of happiness?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You, who have had happiness granted to you. That isn&rsquo;t what made me cry,
      though. I cried because I was glad. You and I, with all this great span of
      years between us, and yet&mdash;so wonderfully alike! I had always thought
      of myself as a creature utterly apart.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, that is how all young people think of themselves. It wears off. Tell
      me about this wonderful resemblance of ours.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He sat attentive while she described her heart to him. But when, at the
      close of her confidences, she said, &ldquo;So you see it&rsquo;s a case of sheer
      heredity, grand-papa,&rdquo; the word &ldquo;Fiddlesticks!&rdquo; would out.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Forgive me, my dear,&rdquo; he said, patting her hand. &ldquo;I was very much
      interested. But I do believe young people are even more staggered by
      themselves than they were in my day. And then, all these grand theories
      they fall back on! Heredity... as if there were something to baffle us in
      the fact of a young woman liking to be admired! And as if it were passing
      strange of her to reserve her heart for a man she can respect and look up
      to! And as if a man&rsquo;s indifference to her were not of all things the
      likeliest to give her a sense of inferiority to him! You and I, my dear,
      may in some respects be very queer people, but in the matter of the
      affections we are ordinary enough.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh grand-papa, do you really mean that?&rdquo; she cried eagerly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;At my age, a man husbands his resources. He says nothing that he does not
      really mean. The indifference between you and other young women is that
      which lay also between me and other young men: a special attractiveness...
      Thousands of slippers, did I say? Tens of thousands. I had hoarded them
      with a fatuous pride. On the evening of my betrothal I made a bonfire of
      them, visible from three counties. I danced round it all night.&rdquo; And from
      his old eyes darted even now the reflections of those flames.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Glorious!&rdquo; whispered Zuleika. &ldquo;But ah,&rdquo; she said, rising to her feet,
      &ldquo;tell me no more of it&mdash;poor me! You see, it isn&rsquo;t a mere special
      attractiveness that <i>I</i> have. <i>I</i> am irresistible.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A daring statement, my child&mdash;very hard to prove.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hasn&rsquo;t it been proved up to the hilt to-day?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To-day?... Ah, and so they did really all drown themselves for you?...
      Dear, dear!... The Duke&mdash;he, too?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He set the example.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No! You don&rsquo;t say so! He was a greatly-gifted young man&mdash;a true
      ornament to the College. But he always seemed to me rather&mdash;what
      shall I say?&mdash;inhuman... I remember now that he did seem rather
      excited when he came to the concert last night and you weren&rsquo;t yet
      there... You are quite sure you were the cause of his death?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Quite,&rdquo; said Zuleika, marvelling at the lie&mdash;or fib, rather: he had
      been GOING to die for her. But why not have told the truth? Was it
      possible, she wondered, that her wretched vanity had survived her
      renunciation of the world? Why had she so resented just now the doubt cast
      on that irresistibility which had blighted and cranked her whole life?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, my dear,&rdquo; said the Warden, &ldquo;I confess that I am amazed&mdash;astounded.&rdquo;
       Again he adjusted his glasses, and looked at her.
    </p>
    <p>
      She found herself moving slowly around the study, with the gait of a
      mannequin in a dress-maker&rsquo;s show-room. She tried to stop this; but her
      body seemed to be quite beyond control of her mind. It had the insolence
      to go ambling on its own account. &ldquo;Little space you&rsquo;ll have in a convent
      cell,&rdquo; snarled her mind vindictively. Her body paid no heed whatever.
    </p>
    <p>
      Her grandfather, leaning back in his chair, gazed at the ceiling, and
      meditatively tapped the finger-tips of one hand against those of the
      other. &ldquo;Sister Zuleika,&rdquo; he presently said to the ceiling.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well? and what is there so&mdash;so ridiculous in&rdquo;&mdash;but the rest was
      lost in trill after trill of laughter; and these were then lost in sobs.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Warden had risen from his chair. &ldquo;My dear,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;I wasn&rsquo;t
      laughing. I was only&mdash;trying to imagine. If you really want to retire
      from&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do,&rdquo; moaned Zuleika.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then perhaps&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I don&rsquo;t,&rdquo; she wailed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course, you don&rsquo;t, my dear.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, of course?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come, you are tired, my poor child. That is very natural after this
      wonderful, this historic day. Come dry your eyes. There, that&rsquo;s better.
      To-morrow&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do believe you&rsquo;re a little proud of me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Heaven forgive me, I believe I am. A grandfather&rsquo;s heart&mdash;But there,
      good night, my dear. Let me light your candle.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She took her cloak, and followed him out to the hall table. There she
      mentioned that she was going away early to-morrow.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To the convent?&rdquo; he slyly asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, don&rsquo;t tease me, grand-papa.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I am sorry you are going away, my dear. But perhaps, in the
      circumstances, it is best. You must come and stay here again, later on,&rdquo;
       he said, handing her the lit candle. &ldquo;Not in term-time, though,&rdquo; he added.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; she echoed, &ldquo;not in term-time.&rdquo;
     </p>


</section></body></html>
