<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 22</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXII</h2>
    <p>
      Stroke by stroke, the great familiar monody of that incomparable curfew
      rose and fell in the stillness.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nothing of Oxford lingers more surely than it in the memory of Oxford men;
      and to one revisiting these groves nothing is more eloquent of that
      scrupulous historic economy whereby his own particular past is utilised as
      the general present and future. &ldquo;All&rsquo;s as it was, all&rsquo;s as it will be,&rdquo;
       says Great Tom; and that is what he stubbornly said on the evening I here
      record.
    </p>
    <p>
      Stroke by measured and leisured stroke, the old euphonious clangour
      pervaded Oxford, spreading out over the meadows, along the river, audible
      in Iffley. But to the dim groups gathering and dispersing on either bank,
      and to the silent workers in the boats, the bell&rsquo;s message came softened,
      equivocal; came as a requiem for these dead.
    </p>
    <p>
      Over the closed gates of Iffley lock, the water gushed down, eager for the
      sacrament of the sea. Among the supine in the field hard by, there was one
      whose breast bore a faint-gleaming star. And bending over him, looking
      down at him with much love and pity in her eyes, was the shade of Nellie
      O&rsquo;Mora, that &ldquo;fairest witch,&rdquo; to whose memory he had to-day atoned.
    </p>
    <p>
      And yonder, &ldquo;sitting upon the river-bank o&rsquo;ergrown,&rdquo; with questioning
      eyes, was another shade, more habituated to these haunts&mdash;the shade
      known so well to bathers &ldquo;in the abandoned lasher,&rdquo; and to dancers &ldquo;around
      the Fyfield elm in May.&rdquo; At the bell&rsquo;s final stroke, the Scholar Gipsy
      rose, letting fall on the water his gathered wild-flowers, and passed
      towards Cumnor.
    </p>
    <p>
      And now, duly, throughout Oxford, the gates of the Colleges were closed,
      and closed were the doors of the lodging-houses. Every night, for many
      years, at this hour precisely, Mrs. Batch had come out from her kitchen,
      to turn the key in the front-door. The function had long ago become
      automatic. To-night, however, it was the cue for further tears. These did
      not cease at her return to the kitchen, where she had gathered about her
      some sympathetic neighbours&mdash;women of her own age and kind, capacious
      of tragedy; women who might be relied on; founts of ejaculation, wells of
      surmise, downpours of remembered premonitions.
    </p>
    <p>
      With his elbows on the kitchen table, and his knuckles to his brow, sat
      Clarence, intent on belated &ldquo;prep.&rdquo; Even an eye-witness of disaster may
      pall if he repeat his story too often. Clarence had noted in the last
      recital that he was losing his hold on his audience. So now he sat
      committing to memory the names of the cantons of Switzerland, and waving
      aside with a harsh gesture such questions as were still put to him by the
      women.
    </p>
    <p>
      Katie had sought refuge in the need for &ldquo;putting the gentlemen&rsquo;s rooms
      straight,&rdquo; against the arrival of the two families to-morrow. Duster in
      hand, and by the light of a single candle that barely survived the draught
      from the open window, she moved to and fro about the Duke&rsquo;s room, a wan
      and listless figure, casting queerest shadows on the ceiling. There were
      other candles that she might have lit, but this ambiguous gloom suited her
      sullen humour. Yes, I am sorry to say, Katie was sullen. She had not
      ceased to mourn the Duke; but it was even more anger than grief that she
      felt at his dying. She was as sure as ever that he had not loved Miss
      Dobson; but this only made it the more outrageous that he had died because
      of her. What was there in this woman that men should so demean themselves
      for her? Katie, as you know, had at first been unaffected by the death of
      the undergraduates at large. But, because they too had died for Zuleika,
      she was bitterly incensed against them now. What could they have admired
      in such a woman? She didn&rsquo;t even look like a lady. Katie caught the dim
      reflection of herself in the mirror. She took the candle from the table,
      and examined the reflection closely. She was sure she was just as pretty
      as Miss Dobson. It was only the clothes that made the difference&mdash;the
      clothes and the behaviour. Katie threw back her head, and smiled
      brilliantly, hand on hip. She nodded reassuringly at herself; and the
      black pearl and the pink danced a duet. She put the candle down, and undid
      her hair, roughly parting it on one side, and letting it sweep down over
      the further eyebrow. She fixed it in that fashion, and posed accordingly.
      Now! But gradually her smile relaxed, and a mist came to her eyes. For she
      had to admit that even so, after all, she hadn&rsquo;t just that something which
      somehow Miss Dobson had. She put away from her the hasty dream she had had
      of a whole future generation of undergraduates drowning themselves, every
      one, in honour of her. She went wearily on with her work.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently, after a last look round, she went up the creaking stairs, to do
      Mr. Noaks&rsquo; room.
    </p>
    <p>
      She found on the table that screed which her mother had recited so often
      this evening. She put it in the waste-paper basket.
    </p>
    <p>
      Also on the table were a lexicon, a Thucydides, and some note-books. These
      she took and shelved without a tear for the closed labours they bore
      witness to.
    </p>
    <p>
      The next disorder that met her eye was one that gave her pause&mdash;seemed,
      indeed, to transfix her.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Noaks had never, since he came to lodge here, possessed more than one
      pair of boots. This fact had been for her a lasting source of annoyance;
      for it meant that she had to polish Mr. Noaks&rsquo; boots always in the early
      morning, when there were so many other things to be done, instead of
      choosing her own time. Her annoyance had been all the keener because Mr.
      Noaks&rsquo; boots more than made up in size for what they lacked in number.
      Either of them singly took more time and polish than any other pair
      imaginable. She would have recognised them, at a glance, anywhere. Even so
      now, it was at a glance that she recognised the toes of them protruding
      from beneath the window-curtain. She dismissed the theory that Mr. Noaks
      might have gone utterly unshod to the river. She scouted the hypothesis
      that his ghost could be shod thus. By process of elimination she arrived
      at the truth. &ldquo;Mr. Noaks,&rdquo; she said quietly, &ldquo;come out of there.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a slight quiver of the curtain; no more. Katie repeated her
      words. There was a pause, then a convulsion of the curtain. Noaks stood
      forth.
    </p>
    <p>
      Always, in polishing his boots, Katie had found herself thinking of him as
      a man of prodigious stature, well though she knew him to be quite tiny.
      Even so now, at recognition of his boots, she had fixed her eyes to meet
      his, when he should emerge, a full yard too high. With a sharp drop she
      focussed him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;By what right,&rdquo; he asked, &ldquo;do you come prying about my room?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      This was a stroke so unexpected that it left Katie mute. It equally
      surprised Noaks, who had been about to throw himself on his knees and
      implore this girl not to betray him. He was quick, though, to clinch his
      advantage.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;is the first time I have caught you. Let it be the
      last.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Was this the little man she had so long despised, and so superciliously
      served? His very smallness gave him an air of concentrated force. She
      remembered having read that all the greatest men in history had been of
      less than the middle height. And&mdash;oh, her heart leapt&mdash;here was
      the one man who had scorned to die for Miss Dobson. He alone had held out
      against the folly of his fellows. Sole and splendid survivor he stood,
      rock-footed, before her. And impulsively she abased herself, kneeling at
      his feet as at the great double altar of some dark new faith.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are great, sir, you are wonderful,&rdquo; she said, gazing up to him, rapt.
      It was the first time she had ever called him &ldquo;sir.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It is easier, as Michelet suggested, for a woman to change her opinion of
      a man than for him to change his opinion of himself. Noaks, despite the
      presence of mind he had shown a few moments ago, still saw himself as he
      had seen himself during the past hours: that is, as an arrant little
      coward&mdash;one who by his fear to die had put himself outside the pale
      of decent manhood. He had meant to escape from the house at dead of night
      and, under an assumed name, work his passage out to Australia&mdash;a land
      which had always made strong appeal to his imagination. No one, he had
      reflected, would suppose because his body was not retrieved from the water
      that he had not perished with the rest. And he had looked to Australia to
      make a man of him yet: in Encounter Bay, perhaps, or in the Gulf of
      Carpentaria, he might yet end nobly.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus Katie&rsquo;s behaviour was as much an embarrassment as a relief; and he
      asked her in what way he was great and wonderful.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Modest, like all heroes!&rdquo; she cried, and, still kneeling, proceeded to
      sing his praises with a so infectious fervour that Noaks did begin to feel
      he had done a fine thing in not dying. After all, was it not moral
      cowardice as much as love that had tempted him to die? He had wrestled
      with it, thrown it. &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; said he, when her rhapsody was over, &ldquo;perhaps I
      am modest.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And that is why you hid yourself just now?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; he gladly said. &ldquo;I hid myself for the same reason,&rdquo; he added, &ldquo;when
      I heard your mother&rsquo;s footstep.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But,&rdquo; she faltered, with a sudden doubt, &ldquo;that bit of writing which
      Mother found on the table&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That? Oh, that was only a general reflection, copied out of a book.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, won&rsquo;t poor Mother be glad when she knows!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want her to know,&rdquo; said Noaks, with a return of nervousness. &ldquo;You
      mustn&rsquo;t tell any one. I&mdash;the fact is&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, that is so like you!&rdquo; the girl said tenderly. &ldquo;I suppose it was your
      modesty that all this while blinded me. Please, sir, I have a confession
      to make to you. Never till to-night have I loved you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Exquisite was the shock of these words to one who, not without reason, had
      always assumed that no woman would ever love him. Before he knew what he
      was doing, he had bent down and kissed the sweet upturned face. It was the
      first kiss he had ever given outside his family circle. It was an artless
      and a resounding kiss.
    </p>
    <p>
      He started back, dazed. What manner of man, he wondered, was he? A coward,
      piling profligacy on poltroonery? Or a hero, claiming exemption from moral
      law? What was done could not be undone; but it could be righted. He drew
      off from the little finger of his left hand that iron ring which, after a
      twinge of rheumatism, he had to-day resumed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wear it,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You mean&mdash;?&rdquo; She leapt to her feet.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That we are engaged. I hope you don&rsquo;t think we have any choice?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She clapped her hands, like the child she was, and adjusted the ring.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is very pretty,&rdquo; she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is very simple,&rdquo; he answered lightly. &ldquo;But,&rdquo; he added, with a change
      of tone, &ldquo;it is very durable. And that is the important thing. For I shall
      not be in a position to marry before I am forty.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A shadow of disappointment hovered over Katie&rsquo;s clear young brow, but was
      instantly chased away by the thought that to be engaged was almost as
      splendid as to be married.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Recently,&rdquo; said her lover, &ldquo;I meditated leaving Oxford for Australia. But
      now that you have come into my life, I am compelled to drop that notion,
      and to carve out the career I had first set for myself. A year hence, if I
      get a Second in Greats&mdash;and I SHALL&rdquo; he said, with a fierce look that
      entranced her&mdash;&ldquo;I shall have a very good chance of an
      assistant-mastership in a good private school. In eighteen years, if I am
      careful&mdash;and, with you waiting for me, I SHALL be careful&mdash;my
      savings will enable me to start a small school of my own, and to take a
      wife. Even then it would be more prudent to wait another five years, no
      doubt. But there was always a streak of madness in the Noakses. I say
      &lsquo;Prudence to the winds!&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, don&rsquo;t say that!&rdquo; exclaimed Katie, laying a hand on his sleeve.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are right. Never hesitate to curb me. And,&rdquo; he said, touching the
      ring, &ldquo;an idea has just occurred to me. When the time comes, let this be
      the wedding-ring. Gold is gaudy&mdash;not at all the thing for a
      schoolmaster&rsquo;s bride. It is a pity,&rdquo; he muttered, examining her through
      his spectacles, &ldquo;that your hair is so golden. A schoolmaster&rsquo;s bride
      should&mdash;Good heavens! Those ear-rings! Where did you get THEM?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They were given to me to-day,&rdquo; Katie faltered. &ldquo;The Duke gave me them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Indeed?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Please, sir, he gave me them as a memento.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And that memento shall immediately be handed over to his executors.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, sir.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I should think so!&rdquo; was on the tip of Noaks&rsquo; tongue, but suddenly he
      ceased to see the pearls as trinkets finite and inapposite&mdash;saw them,
      in a flash, as things transmutable by sale hereafter into desks, forms,
      black-boards, maps, lockers, cubicles, gravel soil, diet unlimited, and
      special attention to backward pupils. Simultaneously, he saw how mean had
      been his motive for repudiating the gift. What more despicable than
      jealousy of a man deceased? What sillier than to cast pearls before
      executors? Sped by nothing but the pulse of his hot youth, he had wooed
      and won this girl. Why flinch from her unsought dowry?
    </p>
    <p>
      He told her his vision. Her eyes opened wide to it. &ldquo;And oh,&rdquo; she cried,
      &ldquo;then we can be married as soon as you take your degree!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He bade her not be so foolish. Who ever heard of a head-master aged
      three-and-twenty? What parent or guardian would trust a stripling? The
      engagement must run its course. &ldquo;And,&rdquo; he said, fidgeting, &ldquo;do you know
      that I have hardly done any reading to-day?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You want to read NOW&mdash;TO-NIGHT?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I must put in a good two hours. Where are the books that were on my
      table?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Reverently&mdash;he was indeed a king of men&mdash;she took the books down
      from the shelf, and placed them where she had found them. And she knew not
      which thrilled her the more&mdash;the kiss he gave her at parting, or the
      tone in which he told her that the one thing he could not and would not
      stand was having his books disturbed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Still less than before attuned to the lugubrious session downstairs, she
      went straight up to her attic, and did a little dance there in the dark.
      She threw open the lattice of the dormer-window, and leaned out, smiling,
      throbbing.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Emperors, gazing up, saw her happy, and wondered; saw Noaks&rsquo; ring on
      her finger, and would fain have shaken their grey heads.
    </p>
    <p>
      Presently she was aware of a protrusion from the window beneath hers. The
      head of her beloved! Fondly she watched it, wished she could reach down to
      stroke it. She loved him for having, after all, left his books. It was
      sweet to be his excuse. Should she call softly to him? No, it might shame
      him to be caught truant. He had already chidden her for prying. So she did
      but gaze down on his head silently, wondering whether in eighteen years it
      would be bald, wondering whether her own hair would still have the fault
      of being golden. Most of all, she wondered whether he loved her half so
      much as she loved him.
    </p>
    <p>
      This happened to be precisely what he himself was wondering. Not that he
      wished himself free. He was one of those in whom the will does not, except
      under very great pressure, oppose the conscience. What pressure here? Miss
      Batch was a superior girl; she would grace any station in life. He had
      always been rather in awe of her. It was a fine thing to be suddenly loved
      by her, to be in a position to over-rule her every whim. Plighting his
      troth, he had feared she would be an encumbrance, only to find she was a
      lever. But&mdash;was he deeply in love with her? How was it that he could
      not at this moment recall her features, or the tone of her voice, while of
      deplorable Miss Dobson, every lineament, every accent, so vividly haunted
      him? Try as he would to beat off these memories, he failed, and&mdash;some
      very great pressure here!&mdash;was glad he failed; glad though he found
      himself relapsing to the self-contempt from which Miss Batch had raised
      him. He scorned himself for being alive. And again, he scorned himself for
      his infidelity. Yet he was glad he could not forget that face, that voice&mdash;that
      queen. She had smiled at him when she borrowed the ring. She had said
      &ldquo;Thank you.&rdquo; Oh, and now, at this very moment, sleeping or waking,
      actually she was somewhere&mdash;she! herself! This was an incredible, an
      indubitable, an all-magical fact for the little fellow.
    </p>
    <p>
      From the street below came a faint cry that was as the cry of his own
      heart, uttered by her own lips. Quaking, he peered down, and dimly saw,
      over the way, a cloaked woman.
    </p>
    <p>
      She&mdash;yes, it was she herself&mdash;came gliding to the middle of the
      road, gazing up at him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;At last!&rdquo; he heard her say. His instinct was to hide himself from the
      queen he had not died for. Yet he could not move.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Or,&rdquo; she quavered, &ldquo;are you a phantom sent to mock me? Speak!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good evening,&rdquo; he said huskily.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I knew,&rdquo; she murmured, &ldquo;I knew the gods were not so cruel. Oh man of my
      need,&rdquo; she cried, stretching out her arms to him, &ldquo;oh heaven-sent, I see
      you only as a dark outline against the light of your room. But I know you.
      Your name is Noaks, isn&rsquo;t it? Dobson is mine. I am your Warden&rsquo;s
      grand-daughter. I am faint and foot-sore. I have ranged this desert city
      in search of&mdash;of YOU. Let me hear from your own lips that you love
      me. Tell me in your own words&mdash;&rdquo; She broke off with a little scream,
      and did not stand with forefinger pointed at him, gazing, gasping.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Listen, Miss Dobson,&rdquo; he stammered, writhing under what he took to be the
      lash of her irony. &ldquo;Give me time to explain. You see me here&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hush,&rdquo; she cried, &ldquo;man of my greater, my deeper and nobler need! Oh hush,
      ideal which not consciously I was out for to-night&mdash;ideal vouchsafed
      to me by a crowning mercy! I sought a lover, I find a master. I sought but
      a live youth, was blind to what his survival would betoken. Oh master, you
      think me light and wicked. You stare coldly down at me through your
      spectacles, whose glint I faintly discern now that the moon peeps forth.
      You would be readier to forgive me the havoc I have wrought if you could
      for the life of you understand what charm your friends found in me. You
      marvel, as at the skull of Helen of Troy. No, you don&rsquo;t think me hideous:
      you simply think me plain. There was a time when I thought YOU plain&mdash;you
      whose face, now that the moon shines full on it, is seen to be of a beauty
      that is flawless without being insipid. Oh that I were a glove upon that
      hand, that I might touch that cheek! You shudder at the notion of such
      contact. My voice grates on you. You try to silence me with frantic though
      exquisite gestures, and with noises inarticulate but divine. I bow to your
      will, master. Chasten me with your tongue.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am not what you think me,&rdquo; gibbered Noaks. &ldquo;I was not afraid to die for
      you. I love you. I was on my way to the river this afternoon, but I&mdash;I
      tripped and sprained my ankle, and&mdash;and jarred my spine. They carried
      me back here. I am still very weak. I can&rsquo;t put my foot to the ground. As
      soon as I can&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Just then Zuleika heard a little sharp sound which, for the fraction of an
      instant, before she knew it to be a clink of metal on the pavement, she
      thought was the breaking of the heart within her. Looking quickly down,
      she heard a shrill girlish laugh aloft. Looking quickly up, she descried
      at the unlit window above her lover&rsquo;s a face which she remembered as that
      of the land-lady&rsquo;s daughter.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Find it, Miss Dobson,&rdquo; laughed the girl. &ldquo;Crawl for it. It can&rsquo;t have
      rolled far, and it&rsquo;s the only engagement-ring you&rsquo;ll get from HIM,&rdquo; she
      said, pointing to the livid face twisted painfully up at her from the
      lower window. &ldquo;Grovel for it, Miss Dobson. Ask him to step down and help
      you. Oh, he can! That was all lies about his spine and ankle. Afraid,
      that&rsquo;s what he was&mdash;I see it all now&mdash;afraid of the water. I
      wish you&rsquo;d found him as I did&mdash;skulking behind the curtain. Oh,
      you&rsquo;re welcome to him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t listen,&rdquo; Noaks cried down. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t listen to that person. I admit I
      have trifled with her affections. This is her revenge&mdash;these wicked
      untruths&mdash;these&mdash;these&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Zuleika silenced him with a gesture. &ldquo;Your tone to me,&rdquo; she said up to
      Katie, &ldquo;is not without offence; but the stamp of truth is on what you tell
      me. We have both been deceived in this man, and are, in some sort,
      sisters.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sisters?&rdquo; cried Katie. &ldquo;Your sisters are the snake and the spider, though
      neither of them wishes it known. I loathe you. And the Duke loathed you,
      too.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;s that?&rdquo; gasped Zuleika.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Didn&rsquo;t he tell you? He told me. And I warrant he told you, too.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He died for love of me: d&rsquo;you hear?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, you&rsquo;d like people to think so, wouldn&rsquo;t you? Does a man who loves a
      woman give away the keepsake she gave him? Look!&rdquo; Katie leaned forward,
      pointing to her ear-rings. &ldquo;He loved ME,&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;He put them in with
      his own hands&mdash;told me to wear them always. And he kissed me&mdash;kissed
      me good-bye in the street, where every one could see. He kissed me,&rdquo; she
      sobbed. &ldquo;No other man shall ever do that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, that he did!&rdquo; said a voice level with Zuleika. It was the voice of
      Mrs. Batch, who a few moments ago had opened the door for her departing
      guests.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, that he did!&rdquo; echoed the guests.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Never mind them, Miss Dobson,&rdquo; cried Noaks, and at the sound of his voice
      Mrs. Batch rushed into the middle of the road, to gaze up. &ldquo;<i>I</i> love
      you. Think what you will of me. I&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You!&rdquo; flashed Zuleika. &ldquo;As for you, little Sir Lily Liver, leaning out
      there, and, I frankly tell you, looking like nothing so much as a gargoyle
      hewn by a drunken stone-mason for the adornment of a Methodist Chapel in
      one of the vilest suburbs of Leeds or Wigan, I do but felicitate the
      river-god and his nymphs that their water was saved to-day by your
      cowardice from the contamination of your plunge.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Shame on you, Mr. Noaks,&rdquo; said Mrs. Batch, &ldquo;making believe you were dead&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Shame!&rdquo; screamed Clarence, who had darted out into the fray.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I found him hiding behind the curtain,&rdquo; chimed in Katie.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And I a mother to him!&rdquo; said Mrs. Batch, shaking her fist. &ldquo;&lsquo;What is life
      without love?&rsquo; indeed! Oh, the cowardly, underhand&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wretch,&rdquo; prompted her cronies.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s kick him out of the house!&rdquo; suggested Clarence, dancing for joy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Zuleika, smiling brilliantly down at the boy, said &ldquo;Just you run up and
      fight him!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Right you are,&rdquo; he answered, with a look of knightly devotion, and darted
      back into the house.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No escape!&rdquo; she cried up to Noaks. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ve got to fight him now. He and
      you are just about evenly matched, I fancy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But, grimly enough, Zuleika&rsquo;s estimate was never put to the test. Is it
      harder for a coward to fight with his fists than to kill himself? Or
      again, is it easier for him to die than to endure a prolonged cross-fire
      of women&rsquo;s wrath and scorn? This I know: that in the life of even the
      least and meanest of us there is somewhere one fine moment&mdash;one high
      chance not missed. I like to think it was by operation of this law that
      Noaks had now clambered out upon the window-sill, silencing, sickening,
      scattering like chaff the women beneath him.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was already not there when Clarence bounded into the room. &ldquo;Come on!&rdquo;
       yelled the boy, first thrusting his head behind the door, then diving
      beneath the table, then plucking aside either window-curtain, vowing
      vengeance.
    </p>
    <p>
      Vengeance was not his. Down on the road without, not yet looked at but by
      the steadfast eyes of the Emperors, the last of the undergraduates lay
      dead; and fleet-footed Zuleika, with her fingers still pressed to her
      ears, had taken full toll now.
    </p>


</section></body></html>
